 
GUIDELINES   
 
 
FOR PREPARATION OF DPRs  
 
FOR WORKS OF INTERCEPTION AND DIVERSION OF  
 
DRAINS AND SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Mission for Clean Ganga  
Ministry of Water Resources,  
River Development &Ganga Rejuvenation  
Govt. of India, New Delhi  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August  2018  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER  
 
The data, information, used in this report has been obtained from different sources . Every care 
has been taken to ensure that the information is correct, consistent and complete as far as 
possible.  
 
The constraints of time and resources available to this nature of assignment, however do not 
preclude the possibility of errors, omissions etc. in the data and consequently in the guideline  
preparation.  
 
The contents of this guideline s can be used freely with the request that a reference may be made 
as follows:  
 “Guideline For preparation of DPRs for works of interception and diversion of dr ains and 
sewage treatment plants” , National Mission for Clean Ganga, Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development &Ganga Rejuvenation, Govt. of India, New Delhi, June 2018.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
 
The National Mission for Clean Ganga  (NMCG) , Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD & GR ) has given the assignment of 
developing fresh ‘Guidelines for Interception, Diversion & Sewage Treatment Plant Works ’ to 
the Alternate Hydro Energy Centre, Indian Institut e of Technology – Roorkee , which would 
serve as DPR Template to be used by States & Consultants to prepare specific DPRs.  
 
A workshop was also organized by NMCG at New Delhi where all stakeholders 
covering state nodal agencies, state project management gro ups, PSUs, academic institutions 
and mu ltilateral bodies  participated and the matter was deliberated. Observations / comments 
received via emails from World Bank, Support for Ganga Rejuvenation (SGR) Project, UP -
SPMG , IIT Kharagpur, Tata Consulting Engineer s Ltd, Engineers India Ltd (EIL), NBCC, 
Engineering Projects India Ltd (EPIL)  and Aligarh Muslim University (AMU)  were considered 
and after a series of discussions at NMCG , the guidelines were finalized.  
 
We are especially grateful to Shri Upendra Prasad Singh, Secretary, MoWR, RD  & GR 
and to the group of officials of NMCG led by Shri Rajiv Ranjan Mishra, Director General, 
NMCG  and Shri  Hitesh Kumar S. Makwana, Executive Director (Projects)  including Dr. 
Pravin  Kumar , Director (Technical) and Shri Rajat G upta, Sr. Specialist . Suggestions received 
from Shri D evendra Pratap  Mathuria, Executive Director (Technical) are thankfully 
acknowledged.  
 
Shri Vinay Shankar and Shri V. K. Gupta were other members of the team that prepared 
the guidelines. Their contribut ions are thankfully acknowledged.  
 
 
 
 
 
(ARUN KUMAR)  
AHEC, IIT Roorkee  
 
  Contents  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  i 
CHAPTER 1: Introduction  1 
1.1. GANGA BASIN  1 
1.2. STATUS OF WATER QUALITY  1 
1.3. ACTION TAKEN BY AUTHORITIES FOR RIVER GANGA  1 
1.3.1.  National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG)  1 
1.3.2.  Ganga River Basin Management Plan  2 
1.3.3.  Integrated Ganga Conservation Mission Namely “Namami Gange”  2 
1.3.4.  Categorisation of Towns on the Basis of I&D and Treatment Infrastructure  2 
1.3.5.  Integrated Plan of Management of Wastewater – Measures Involved  3 
1.3.6.  Phase wise preparation and implementation of the Pollution Abatement Scheme  3 
CHAPTER 2: COLLECTION OF DATA  5 
2.1. INTRODUCTION  5 
2.2. PROJECT AREA  5 
2.3. DATA REQUIRED  5 
2.4. TOWN RELATED DATA  5 
2.4.1.  General Information of the town  5 
2.4.2.  Maps  6 
2.4.3.  Use of State of Art Tools Like Remote Sensing and GIS  6 
2.4.4.  Status of  Sewerage Management Works Undertaken in the Past, if any  7 
2.4.5.  Population of the Town  9 
2.4.6.  Water Supply  9 
2.4.7.  Status of River  10 
2.4.8.  Sewage Generation  12 
2.4.8.1.  Volume of Sewage Generated  12 
2.4.8.2.  Measurement of Flows in Existing Drains/Sewers  13 
2.4.8.3.  Characteristics of Raw Sewage  20 
2.4.8.4.  Pollution from commercial, industrial and agricultural activities.  21 
2.4.8.5.  Raw Sewage Characteristics for newly developed areas and in the absence of 
drain or outfall  22 
2.4.9.  Soil Investigations  22 
2.4.10.  Ground Water Investigations:  23 
2.5. SOURCES OF DATA  23 
CHAPTER 3: PREPARATION OF DETAILED PROJECT REPORT  24 
3.1 OBJECTIVES OF DPRAND OUTCOME  24 
3.2 DESIGNS  24 3.3 DEVELOPING OPTIONS FOR THE SCHEMES  25 
3.3.1  Utilising an existing system  25 
3.3.2  Condition assessment  25 
3.3.3  Alternatives  25 
3.3.4  Techno Economic Evaluation  25 
3.4 RIVER WATER QUALITY  26 
3.4.1  Water Quality Standards for Rivers as per CPCB  26 
3.4.2  Actual Water Quality of the River  27 
3.5 DESIGN PERIODS  27 
3.6 FUTURE POPULATION  28 
3.6.1  Census Population  28 
3.6.2  Future Population Projections  28 
3.6.3  Floating population  28 
3.6.4  Unauthorized Population:  29 
3.6.5  Design Population adopted (including floating population)  29 
3.7 RATE OF WATER SUPPLY  29 
3.7.1  Required rate of water supply, as per CPHEEO Manual  29 
3.7.2  Rate of water supply required for institutions  29 
3.7.3  Status of Existing Water Supply in the project area  30 
3.7.4  Rate of water supply adopted  31 
3.8 INTERCEPTION FACTOR  31 
3.9 GROUND WATER INFILTRATION  31 
3.10  PEAK FACTORS  31 
3.11  DESIGN FLOWS  32 
3.12  INTERCEPTION  WORKS  33 
3.13  DIVERSION / INTERCEPTING SEWERS  34 
3.14  SEWAGE PUMPING STATIONS  35 
3.15  RISING MAINS  36 
3.16  SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS  37 
3.16.1  Raw Sewage Quality for STP Design  37 
3.16.2  Treated effluent Quality  38 
3.16.3  Sewage Treatment Technology  39 
3.16.4  Life Cycle Cost Analysis  41 
3.16.5  Provision for STPs on technology neutral basis  42 
3.16.6  Capacity / location of STP  42 
3.16.7  Condition assessment of existing STPs  42 
3.16.8  Resource Recovery  42 3.16.9  Sludge Management  43 
3.16.10  Septage / Faecal Sludge Management  43 
3.16.11  Reuse of treated sewage  43 
3.16.12  Instrumentation and Data Acquisition  43 
3.17  LAND REQUIREMENT  44 
3.18  FACTORS IN SELECTION OF SYSTEM OF WASTE WATER MANAGEMENT  44 
3.19  PREPARING DRAWINGS  45 
3.20  DEDICATED ELECTRICITY FEEDERS AND GENERATORS  46 
3.21  OBJECTIVES, PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS AND RISK FACTORS  46 
3.22  PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS  46 
3.23  COST ESTIMATES  47 
3.24  STRUCTURE OF DPRs  47 
3.25  FLOW CHART OF ACTIVITIES FOR PREPARATION OF DPRS  47 
4.1 CRITICALITY OF O&M  49 
4.2 RESOURCE RECOVERY AND REVENUE GENERATION  50 
4.3 COST ESTIMATES FOR O&M  50 
CHAPTER 5: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION & PUBLIC AWARENESS AND  STAKE HOLDERS 
CONSULTATION  52 
5.1 INTRODUCTION  52 
5.2 OBJECTIVE  52 
5.3 PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AS FRONT ENDACTIVITY  53 
5.4 TARGET GROUPS  53 
5.5 ACTION POINTS FOR COMMUNITY AWARENESS  53 
5.6 IMPORTANT STAGES OF STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION AWARENESS GENERATION 
AND SECURING PUBLIC PARTICIPATION  55 
5.7 COST ESTIMATE  56 
CHAPTER 6: TRAINING, HRD AND CAPACITY BUILDING  58 
6.1 PHASES OF POLLUTION ABATEMENT PROJECT  58 
6.2 DOMAINS OF KNOWLEDGE INVOLVED  58 
6.3 HUMAN   RESOURCE   REQUIRED  58 
6.4 EDUCATION NEEDS  58 
6.5 TRAINING NEEDS  59 
6.6 EXPERIENCE NEEDS  59 
6.7 FULFILLING MANPOWER NEEDS –MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT PLAN  59 
6.8 CAPACITY BUILDING  60 
6.9 COST ESTIMATES  60 
CHAPTER 7: PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM  62 
CHAPTER 8: PROJECT MANAGEMENT & INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES  63 8.1 NATIONAL MISSION FOR CLEAN GANGA (NMCG)  63 
8.1.1  State Program Management Group (SPMG)  63 
8.1.2  Executing Agencies  63 
8.1.3  Program Management Consultancy  63 
8.1.4  Technical Support Consultancy  63 
8.1.5  Other Partner Agencies  64 
8.1.6  Tiered Implementation Structure  64 
8.1.7  Programme Framework  64 
8.1.8  Preparation of DPR Component Scheme Wise and Integrated Summary  64 
8.1.9  Appointment of Team to Prepare DPR Departmentally  64 
8.1.10  Appointment of Consultants to Prepare DPR  65 
8.1.11  ULB participation  65 
8.1.12  Responsibility for activities and schemes  65 
8.2 MONITORING, SUPERVISION, GUIDANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  66 
8.3 IMPLEMENTATION OF DPR – EXECUTION OF WORKS PROPOSED IN THE DPR  66 
8.3.1  Mode of Implementation:  66 
8.4 INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES IN MANAGEMENT  66 
8.4.1  Activities  66 
8.4.2  Overlap in roles of institutions:  66 
8.5 COST ESTIMATE OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
 67 
CHAPTER 9: PERFORMANCE MONITORING  68 
CHAPTER 10: COMPLETION SCHEDULE  69 
CHAPTER 11: ENVIRONMENT IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
PLAN  70 
CHAPTER 12: GOVERNANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACTION PLAN (GAAP)  72 
CHAPTER 13: COST ESTIMATES  74 
Annexure – I: Map of the Ganga River Basin  77 
Annexure – II: Line diagram of Ganga River  78 
Annexure –  III: Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring Order, 2005  79 
Annexure –IV: Suggestive Structure of the DPRs  88 
Annexure – V: Directions issued by CPCB vide notification dated Mar 02, 2015  For On Line 
Monitoring of Influent and Effluent Quality of Highly Polluting Indu stries  94 
Annexure – VI: Completion Report  100  
Annexure –VII: Utilisation Certificate  102  
 
  List of Tables  
Table 2.1: Present Sewage Disposal System  ................................ ................................ .......................  7 
Table 2.2: Details of existing STPs  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  8 
Table 2.3: Status of interception of drains  ................................ ................................ ..........................  9 
Table 2.4: Census Population of the town during the last decades  ................................ ...................  9 
Table 2.5: Status of water supply in the town / project area  ................................ .............................  9 
Table 2.6: Water quality of river  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  11 
Table 2.7: Discharge carried by drains as measured on ---- ................................ ............................  12 
Table 2.8: Daily Incoming Discharge at STPs installed and functionin g--- ................................ ..... 13 
Table 2.9: Raw Sewage Characteristics, as measured on ----. ................................ ..........................  20 
Table 2.10 : Concentration of various parameters in the absence of drain or outfall  ....................  22 
Table 3.1: River Classification Based on Designated Best Use ................................ ................................ ..... 26 
Table 3.2: Design Periods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  27 
Table 3.3: Recommended Per Capita Water Supply Levels for Designing Schemes  ...........................  29 
Table 3.4: Water Supply Requirements for Institutional Needs  ................................ ................................ . 30 
Table 3.5: Ground Water Infiltration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  31 
Table 3.6: Peak Factors for contributory population  ................................ ................................ ......................  31 
Table 3.7:Table: Design Flows to be adopted for different components  ................................ .................  33 
Table 3.8:Configuration of Sewage Pumps, based on length of rising mains  ................................ ........  35 
Table 3.9:Configuration of Sewage Pumps, based on size of sewage pumping station  .....................  35 
Table 3.10: Effluent Standards for Sewage treatment plants ................................ ................................ ....... 38 
Table 4.1: Abstract of Annual O&M Cost  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  51 
Table 5.1: Cost Estimate for Public Awareness and Public Participation  ................................ ...............  56 
Table 6.1: Educational Requirement of Staff Required for Pollution Abatement projects  ..............  58 
Table 6.2: Cost Estimate of HRD and capacity building  ................................ ................................ ..................  60 
Table 8. 1: Planning and Implementing Agencies  ................................ ................................ .............................  65 
Table 8.2: Cost Estimate of Project Management and Institutional arrangements - State Level 
Implementing Agency  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  67 
Table 8.3: Cost Estimate of Project Management and Institutional Arrangements Dist ./City Level 
Unit  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  67 
Table 13.1: Abstract of Cost of Works Proposed  ................................ ................................ ...............................  74 
 
Table of Figures  
 
Fig. 1: Typical mounting of a V Notch in a drain  ................................ ................................ ..............  14 
Fig. 2 : Typical mounting of a rectangular weir in a drain  ................................ ............................  15 
Fig. 3 : Typical mounting of a rectangular weir with end constrictions in a drain  ..............  16 
Fig. 4 : Palmer -Bowlus flume installation in drains  ................................ ................................ .........  16 
Fig. 5 : Palmer -Bowlus flume installation in circular sewer  ................................ .........................  17 
Fig. 6 : Configuration and use of Palmer -Bowlus flume  ................................ ................................ . 18 
Fig. 7:  Instrumentation for flow measurement and sampling in urban large conduits  .... 19 
Fig. 8 : Annualised  cost (as in 2008) of treatment and corresponding land requirement for 
various treatment technologies  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  40 
Fig. 9: Flow chart of Activities for Preparation of DPR  ................................ ................................ .. 48 
 ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ADB  
ADP  
AE 
AHEC  
AL 
AMRUT  : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Asian Development Bank  
Area Development Plan  
Assistant Engineer  
Alternate Hydro Energy Centre , IIT Roorkee  
Aerated Lagoon  
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation  
ASP 
BCM  : 
: Activated Sludge Process  
Billion Cubic Meters  
BGL  : Below Ground Level  
BHP  
BIS : 
: Break Horse Power  
Bureau of Indian Standards  
BOD  
BOOT  
BOQ  
BOT  
BHP  
BTO  
CAD  
CAG  
CBO  
CCTV  
CD : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Biochemical Oxygen Demand  
Build Own Operate Transfer  
Bill of Quantities  
Build Operate Transfer  
Break Horse Power  
Build Transfer Operate  
Computer Aided Design  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
Community Based Organisations  
Closed Circuit Television  
Compact Disc  
CDM  
CDP  
CE : 
: 
: Clean Development Mechanism  
City Development Plan  
Chief Engineer  
CER  
CETP  
CFL 
CGWB  
CI 
CMS  : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Certified Emission Reduction  
Common Effluent Treatment Plant  
Compact Fluorescent Lamp  
Central Ground Water Board  
Cast Iron  
Cubic Meter Per Second  
COD  : Chemical Oxygen Demand  
CPCB  : Central Pollution Control Board  
CPHEEO  
CRR  
CSIR  : 
: 
: Central Public Health Environmental Engineering Organisation  
Critical Review Report  
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  
CSP 
CTE  : 
: City Sanitation Plan  
Consultant to Establish  DI 
CMC  : 
: Ductile Iron  
Citizen’s Monitoring Committee  
CTC  : Community Toilet Complex  
CW : Civil Works  
CWC  
CPM  
CUMEC  : 
: 
: Central Water Commission  
Critical Path Method  
Cubic meter per second  
DBO  
DBOT  : 
: Design, Build & Operate  
Design, Build Operate Transfer  
DG 
DJB : 
: Diesel Generator  
Delhi Jal Board  
DO : Dissolved Oxygen  
DPR  
D/S 
DSR  
DSR  
DWCPP  
DWF  
EA 
EE 
EIA : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Detailed Project Report  
Down Stream  
District Schedule of Rates  
Delhi Schedule of Rates  
Double Wall Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe  
Dry Weather Flow  
Executing Agency  
Executive Engineer  
Environmental Impact Assessment  
ELCB  : Earthing Leakage Circuit Breaker  
EM 
EMI 
EPA  
ESAMP  
ESC 
EWS  : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Electrical and Mechanical  
Equated Monthly Instalment  
Environment Protection Agency  
Environmental Sanitation and Management Plan  
Empowered Steering Committee  
Economically Weaker Section  
FAB  
FBAS  
FBR  
FC 
F/M   : 
: 
: 
: 
: Fluidized Aerated Bed  
Fixed Bed Biofilm Activated Sludge  
Fed Batch Reactor  
Faecal Coliform  
Food to Microorganism  
FR 
FR 
GA 
GAC  : 
: 
: 
: Feasibility Report  
Frequency rate  
General Arrangement  
Granular Activated Carbon  
GAP  
GRBMP  
GAAP : 
: 
: Ganga Action Plan  
Ganga River Basin Management Plan  
Governance and Accountability Action Plan  GI : Galvanised Iron  
GIS 
GIS : 
: Geology Investigation Survey  
Geographical Information System  
GL 
GoAP  : 
: Ground Level  
Gomti Action Plan  
GoI 
GoS 
GoUP  
GPCU  
GRC  : 
: 
: 
: Government of India  
Group of Secretaries  
Government of Uttar Pradesh  
Ganga Pollution Control Unit  
Grievance Redressal Cell  
GRP  
GWI  
DI 
HDPE  
HP : 
: 
: 
: 
: Glass Reinforced Plastic  
Ground Water Infiltration  
Ductile Iron  
High Density Polyethylene  
Horse Power  
HRD  
HRT  
HT : 
: 
: Human Resource Development  
Hydraulic Retention Time  
High Tension  
HUDCO  
IA 
I&D 
IEC 
IIPA  
IIT : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd.  
Impact Assessment  
Interception and Diversion  
Information, Education and Communication  
Indian Institute of Public Administration  
Indian Institute of Technology  
IPS 
IL 
IRMA  
IS 
ISO 
ISRO  
IT 
ITI : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Intermediate Pumping Station  
Invert Level  
Independent Review and Monitoring Agency  
Indian Standard  
International Organisation for Standardisation  
Indian Space Research Organisation  
Information Technology  
Industrial Training Institutes  
IWBC  
IWWA  
JICA  : 
: 
: Integrated Wood Based Crematoria  
Indian Water Works Association  
Japan International Cooperation Agency  
JnNURM  
JE 
JS 
Kva 
KWH  : 
: 
: 
: 
: Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewable Mission  
Junior Engineer  
Jal Sansthan  
Kilovolts Ampere  
Kilowatt Hours  LCC  : Life Cycle Cost  
LCS 
LIC 
LPCD  
LPM  
LPS 
MH : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Low Cost Sanitation  
Life Insurance Corporation  
Litres per Capita per Day  
Litres per Minute  
Litres per Second  
Manhole  
Mld : Million Litres per day  
MoA  
MBBR  
MBR  
MGD  
MG/L  
MIS 
MLD  
MLSS  
MLVSS  : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Memorandum of Agreement  
Moving Bed Biofilm Reactor  
Membrane Bio Reactor  
Million Gallons per Day  
Milligram/litre  
Management Information System  
Million Litres Per Day  
Mixed Liquor Suspended Solids  
Mixed Liquor Volatile Suspended Solids  
MoEF CC : Ministry of Environment , Forest and Climate Change Govt. of 
India  
MNRE  : Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Govt. of India  
MoUD  
MP 
MP 
MPN  : 
: 
: 
: Ministry of Urban Development, Govt. of India  
Master Plan  
Member of Parliament  
Most Probable Number  
MPS  
MoWR, 
RD&GR  : 
: Main Pumping Station  
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation  
MSW  
MWW  
NABARD  
NDMA  
NEERI  : 
: 
: 
: 
: Municipal Solid Waste  
M 
unicipal Waste Water  
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development  
Natural Disaster Management Authority  
National Environmental Engineering Research Institute  
NGRBA  
NGO  
NIC 
NICNET  : 
: 
: 
: National Ganga River Basin Authority  
Non-Governmental Organisation  
National Informatics Centre  
Nation -wide Information Network  
NIT 
NMCG         NOC  : 
: 
: Notice Inviting Tender  
National Mission for Clean Ganga  
No Objection Certificate  NRCD  : National River Conservation Directorate  
NRCP  : National River Conservation Plan  
O&M  
OP 
PC 
PDC  
PF 
PFR : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Operation and Maintenance  
Oxidation Pond  
Personal Computer  
Permanent Disabilities Fatalities  
Power Factor  
Pre-Feasibility Report  
PERT  : Programme Evaluation and Review Technique  
PHED  
PIL 
PMC  : 
: 
: Public Health Engineering Department  
Public Interest Litigation  
Project Management Consultant  
PMU  
PPM  
PPP 
PMG  
PPMU  : 
: 
: 
: 
: Project Management Unit  
Parts Per Million  
Public Private Partnership  
Project Management Group  
Project Preparation and Management Unit  
PS 
PSC 
PVC  
R&D  
RBC  
RBI 
RCC  
RCCE  
RTI 
RWC  
SAFF  : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Pumping Station  
Pre-stressed Concrete  
Poly Vinyl Chloride  
Research and Development  
Rotating Biological Contactor  
Reserve Bank of India  
Reinforced Cement Concrete  
Recurring Cost of Capital Expenditure  
Right to Information  
Restricted Work Capacity  
Submerged  Aeration Fixed Film  
SBR  
SCADA  
SCBA  
SFBR  : 
: 
: 
: Sequencing Batch Reactor  
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition  
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Submerged Fixed Bed Reactor  
SOR  : Schedule of Rates  
SPCB  
SPMG  : 
: State Pollution Control Board  
State Project management Group  
SPMU  : State Project Management Unit  
SPS 
SR 
SRT : 
: 
: Sewage Pumping Station  
Severity Rate  
Solid Retention Time  
SS : Suspended Solids  
STP : Sewage Treatment Plant  SWD  : Side Water Depth  
SWM  : Solid Waste Management  
SWM  
TDS  : 
: Sewerage Water Management  
Total Dissolved Solids  
TF 
TKN  
TPA  : 
: 
: Trickling Filter  
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen  
Third Party Appraisal  
TPI : Third Party Inspection  
TSS 
UA : 
: Total Suspended Solids  
Urban Agglomeration  
UASB  
UF : 
: Up flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket  
Ultra -Filtration  
UFW  
UJS 
UPJN  : 
: 
: Unaccounted for Water  
Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan  
UP Jal Nigam  
UIDSSMT  
 
UKPJN  
UPSVENN  : 
 
: 
: Urban Information Development Scheme  
for Small and Medium Towns  
Uttarakhand  PeyJal Nigam  
Uttarakhand  Peyjal  Sansadhan  Vikas  Evam  Nirman Nigam  
ULB  
U/S 
uPVC  
UNICEF  
USAID  
UV 
UWSS  
VSS 
YAP  
WB 
WHO  
WQM  
WR, RD&GR  
 
WSSB  
WSP  
WTP  
WWTP  
ZLD  : 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: Urban Local Body  
Up Stream  
Unplasticised Poly Vinyl Chloride  
United Nations International Children Emergency Fund  
United States Agency for International Development  
Ultra Violet  
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Sector  
Volatile Suspended Solids  
Yamuna Action Plan  
World Bank  
World Health Organisation  
Water Quality Monitoring  
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation  
Water Supply and Sewage Board  
Waste Stabilisation Pond  
Water Treatment Plant  
Waste Water Treatment Plant  
Zero Liquid Discharge  
  i EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG ) was constituted for effective abatement of 
pollution and rejuvenation, protection and management of the River Ganga and its tributaries.  Under 
the above mission, no untreated municipal sewage and industrial effluent is to be discharged into the 
River Ganga.  
 
An Integrated Ganga Conservation Mission namely “Namami Gange” has been approved as 
‘Flagship Programme’ set up in June 2015 to accomplish effective abatem ent of pollution , 
conservation and rejuvenation  of the river.  
 
An ideal approach to achieve the above objective, is to prepare an integrated and 
comprehensive scheme to intercept and treat the entire quantity of waste water generated in the town 
and would flow through the drains into the Ganga. To improve the water quali ty of the Ganga in the 
immediate term, is to prevent untreated wastewater of drains from joining the river by intercepting 
those having their outfalls in the Ganga, divert them through sewers to Sewage Treatment Plants 
(STPs) for treatment and allow only t reated sewage to be discharged into the Ganga.  
. 
The present ‘ Guidelines for preparation of project reports under NRCP and NGRBA, Ministry 
of Environment & Forests’  were prepared in Dec 2010. These guide lines provided for preparation of 
DPRs for pollution abatement of rivers in three steps namely City Sanitation Plan (CSP), Feasibility 
Report (FR) followed by the Detailed Project Report (DPR).   
 
In view of the need  to prevent pollution in the immediate term  and the changes that have been 
introduced, the Guidelines for the preparation of  DPRs for interception and diversion of drains out -
falling in to the river  and divert them to STPs for treatment  need to be revised .  
 
The draft guidelines were circulated by NMCG on Mar 30, 2017 to all stakeholders covering 
state nodal agencies, state project management groups, PSUs, academic institutions and multilateral 
bodies. Observations / comments were received from the World Ba nk, Support for Ganga 
Rejuvenation (SGR) Project, UP -SGRCA, IIT Kharagpur, Tata Consulting Engineers Ltd, Engineers 
India Ltd (EIL), NBCC, Engineering Projects India Ltd (EPIL)  and Aligarh Muslim University 
(AMU).   
 
A workshop was also organized on May 18 , 2017 by NMCG at New Delhi where all 
stakeholders participated and matter was deliberated for the whole day. After considering the 
suggestions / comments received from different stakeholders through emails and during the workshop, 
the guidelines were finalised . Salient features of the guide lines are as follows:  
 
• The guidelines provide for interception and diversion of drains out -falling in to the river, divert 
them through sewers to STP (s) for treatment . New CPHEEO Manual on Sewerage and Sewage 
Treatment Systems has since been published in Nov 2013. Many provisions of the manual have 
been incorporated into the guidelines.  
• Water Quality Monitoring of the river should be done following the “Uniform Protocol on Water 
Quality Monitoring Order, 2005”.  
• Design periods  for STPs has been increased to 15 years .  
• Rate of water supply for users other than domestic  such as hotels, hostels, schools/colleges, railway 
stations, offices, factories, cinemas etc. has been included . ii • Methodology for measurement of flows in dra ins / sewers h as now been provided in detail. A 
standard format for recording flow measurements has been prescribed.  
• Design Flows  for different components of proposed works have been clarified.  
• Configuration of sewage pumps , hydraulic retention time, volume of sump, immersible pumps etc. 
as recommended in CPHEEO Manual Nov 2013 for sewage pumping stations, have been 
introduced . 
• Instead  of working out economical size,  size of rising mains shall be selected, ensuring velocities 
between 0.8 to 3 m/sec at any time , to avoid silting . Rising mains must be designed for Water 
Hammer Head also.  
• Trenchless technology may be proposed to  be adopted at major road crossings /junction , railway 
tracks and highly d ense roads  for laying of sewers /rising main .  
• For STPs , sulphates and emerging contaminants have been included in the list of raw sewage 
quality parameters. Some upcoming treatment technologies have  also been referred. Highest flood 
levels of drain s/river to provide safety and uninterrupted O&M  of the STP/SPS are to be taken in 
to consideration .  
• Funds for O&M of the assets created shall now be provided by the center for a period of 15 years , 
after which the responsibility of O&M will rest with the S tate Government/ ULB. However, such 
period shall be subject to policy of GoI in vogue.  
• Annual O&M cost beyond 1st year is to be worked out by compounding present cost with general 
price index/inflation , which may be taken  as 5% on Manpower and 2% on Chemicals. However, 
no escalation is to be considered on Power.  
• Provision of quarters for maintenance staff has been deleted, as O&M shall be carried out by the 
contractor .  
• On line monitoring of water qual ity at inlet and outlet of STPs has been proposed to  be carried out 
for which devices shall be installed on STPs for proper monitoring of their performance and taking 
timely remedial measures when necessary.  
• The chapter on Social and Environment Impact Ass essment and Environmental Management Plan 
has been provided .  
• Suggestive structure of the DPRs earlier provided in the Guide Lines has been revised.  
• A flow chart showing different broad activities for preparation of DPRs has been provided . 
• A list of drawings to be provided in DPRs has been provided . 
• Reuse of treated water to a minimum extent of 20% shall be mandatorily explored .   
• A detailed Sludge Management Plan including the treatment, storage, handling and approvals from 
ULBs to accept the solid w aste generated by the STPs for its safe disposal / effective management  
is now to be prepared.  
• Septage/ faecal sludge management practices are to be assessed and appropriate provisions need to 
be built in while designing the STPs.  
• Soil investigation has be en proposed to  be carried out at all major sites such as deep sewers , SPS, 
STPs and for locations such as flood plains, landfill sites and locations having dispersive soil 
characteristics.   
 Page 1 GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF DPRS FOR  
WORKS OF INTERCEPTION &DIVERSIONOF DRAINS AND 
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS   
 
CHAPTER 1: Introduction  
 
1.1. GANGA BASIN  
 
Ganga basin is the largest of the 12 major river basins of India. The river Ganga passes 
through the stat es of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, and West Bengal. Ganga 
has many tributaries. Even though the surface water resource potential of Ganga has been 
assessed as 525 billion cubic meters (BCM), substantial abstraction of water for various 
purposes from the river has impacted the quantity of flows in the river. A map of the Ganga 
River Basin, a flow Diagram of the River may be seen in Annexure I and Annexure II.  
 
1.2. STATUS OF WATER QUALITY  
 
 Rapidly increasing population, rising standards of living and exponential growth of 
industrialization and urbanisation have exposed the river to various forms of degradation. The 
dominant source of pollution is the discharge of untreated wastewater from the towns on the  
banks of Ganga.  
 
 It is estimated th at in the year 2011, the amount of wastewater discharged into the river  
by 36 Class I and 14 Class II towns situated along the mainstream of river Ganga, was 2723 
Mld. Of this quantity, the capacity to treat it was limited to only 1209  Mld (Source: Polluti on 
Assessment: River Ganga, published by CPCB in July 2013).  Although there are non -point 
sources of pollution as well, their contribution is relatively small.  
 
 On the basis of the sources that cause pollution of Ganga, the parameters that have been 
adop ted for judging the water quality of the river are Dissolved Oxygen (DO), Biochemical 
Oxygen Demand (BOD) and Faecal Coliform (FC). Except in the upper reaches of the Ganga 
i.e., from its origin up to Rishikesh, the presence of FC is higher than the permis sible limit for 
bathing throughout the river. The BOD levels are much higher than the desired level in the 
stretch of Ganga from Kannauj to Varanasi. It is therefore a critical stretch. In West Bengal 
again , the BOD is higher in the stretch from Uluberia t o Diamond Harbour.  
 
 Thus the w ater quality of Ganga ri ver is fit for bathing (Class B)  except a few locations 
only, which ha ve already  been identified and corrective actions by sanctioning projects  have 
been taken  by NMCG .  
 
1.3. ACTION TAKEN BY AUTHORITIES FOR RIVER GANGA  
 
A beginning towards its restoration was made with the launching of the Ganga Action 
Plan (GAP) in 1985. Its objective was to improve the water quality in the river. But for a variety 
of reasons only partial success in the objective of poll ution abatement could be achieved.  
 
1.3.1.  National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG)  
 
National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), is an authority constituted under the River Ganga 
(Rejuvenation, Protection and Management) Authorities Order, 2016 of Govt  of India . NMC G  
 Page 2 is a nodal agency for the implementation of the provisions of this Order and for effective 
abatement of pollution and rejuvenation, protection and management of the River Ganga and 
its tributaries. It is an empowered arrangement  with two tier management having 
administrative, appraisal and approval powers and duties, functions and powers for the purpose 
of effective abatement of pollution and rejuvenation, protection and management of the River 
Ganga.  
 
The States comprising River Ganga Basin, namely, Him achal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Haryana, Rajasthan, West 
Bengal and the National Capital Territory of Delhi and such other States, having major 
tributaries of the River Ganga are covered under this  mission.  NMCG  shall approve the 
planning, financing and execution of programmes for abatement of pollution in the River 
Ganga including augmentation of sewerage and effluent treatment infrastructure, catchment 
area treatment, protection of flood plains, c reating public awareness, conservation of aquatic 
and riparian life and biodiversity and such other measures for promoting environmentally 
sustainable river rejuvenation . NMCG shall also coordinate, monitor and review the 
implementation of various programm es or activities taken up for  prevention, control and 
abatement of pollution and protection and management in the River Ganga and its tributaries . 
 
1.3.2.  Ganga River Basin Management Plan  
 
The Ganga River Basin Management Plan (GRBMP) is an integrated river basin 
management plan for maintenance and restoration of wholesomeness of Ganga system and 
improvement of its ecological health with due regard to resolution of conflict of interest in 
water uses in the entire river Basin. This Plan is presumed to have an adequate provision for 
soil, water and energy conservation to accommodate the growing population, urbanization, 
industrialization and agriculture while ensuring that the continuous flow ( Aviral  Dhara ), 
unpolluted flow ( Nirmal  Dhara ), longitudinal and later al connectivity, fluvial geomorphology 
and ecology of the river are protected.  
 
1.3.3.  Integrated Ganga Conservation Mission Namely “Namami  Gange”  
 
An Integrated Ganga Conservation Mission namely “Namami  Gange” has been set up. 
While it seeks to ensure that ulti mately i.e. in the long term there is an integrated and 
comprehensive plan of collection, conveyance and treatment of wastewater in the towns 
covering both the point and non -point sources of pollution, in the immediate term its objective 
would be to ensure  that the quality of Ganga is improved so that it can be put to its best –
designated - use i.e., bathing.  A list of 118 important towns , which contribute to the pollution 
of the Ganga,  has been prepared by NMCG. Important drains that carry the wastewater from 
these towns to the Ganga have been also been identified.  
 
Thus the immediate objective would be to prevent untrea ted wastewater of drains from 
joining the river by intercepting the drains that have outfalls in the Ganga, divert them through 
sewers to Sewage Treatment Plants for treatment and allow only treated sewage to be 
discharged into the Ganga.  
 
1.3.4.  Categorisation o f Towns on the Basis of I&D and Treatment Infrastructure  
 
The towns may fall in several categories based on the type of the existing arrangements 
for the collection, conveyance and treatment of wastewater. In one category of towns / cities  
 Page 3 there may not be any sewers and the wastewater including that from the septic tanks and toilets 
would flow in the covered or uncovered drains on the sides of the streets reaching a storm water 
drain, which in turn would discharge into the Ganga.   
 
In anot her category of towns/cities, there may be localities where sewers are laid and 
localities not provided with sewers. The wastewater would be carried through the sewer or the 
drain to a sewage treatment plant (STP). If a STP has not been installed, the wast ewater would 
be discharged into the Ganga.  
 
In yet another category of towns, I&D and STP schemes may have been constructed. 
However, the system is unable to handle the entire wastewater and there is need to repair, 
upgrade and refurbish the existing infr astructure.  
 
1.3.5.  Integrated Plan of Management of Wastewater – Measures Involved  
 
A sustainable programme to achieve the improvement in the water quality of Ganga 
should deal with the issue of pollution in an integrated and comprehensive manner dealing with 
both point and non -point sources of pollution. It will imply that the following steps be taken  
 
i. Prepare an integrated and comprehensive scheme to intercept and treat the entire 
quantity of wastewater that would be generated in the town and would flow through the 
drains into the Ganga. The existing infrastructure, if any, would be integrated with the 
comprehensive scheme that would be prepared.  
 
ii. If under the GAP, schemes for pollution abatement of the Ganga have been 
implemented, an assessment of the condition of the prevailing infrastructure that exists 
in the town for the disposal of wastewater woul d be required to be made so that it could 
be repaired, upgraded and refurbished.   
 
1.3.6.  Phase wise preparation and implementation of the Pollution Abatement Scheme  
 
A comprehensive approach as outlined above will require resources and considerable 
time for pre paring and implementing schemes. It, therefore, makes sense that the objective of 
improving the water quality may be achieved in two phases.  
 
Phase 1 will seek to improve the water quality of the Ganga in the immediate term. The 
wastewater from the towns / cities situated on the bank of river Ganga in five basin states of 
Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal, flowing into the Ganga through 
the drains may be intercepted, diverted and treated before  discharge in to Ganga. The 
interce ption, diversion and treatment schemes should be so designed that they take into 
consideration the wastewater load that will need to be dealt with when the long term integrated 
comprehensive wastewater management plan is prepared.  
 
Phase 2 will consist of the integrated and comprehensive schemes to deal with the 
pollution from both point and non -point sources of pollution. The works planned and 
implemented in Phase 1 will be integral part of the schemes in Phase 2.  
 
Since the formation of existing guide li nes, a number of changes such as policy 
decisions, revision of water quality parameters and design criteria in new CPHEEO Manual on 
Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems in Nov 2013 etc. have taken place. The Guidelines,  
 Page 4 therefore, need to be revised. Thes e Guidelines, accordingly, deal with the various aspects of 
schemes in Phase 1.    
 Page 5 CHAPTER 2: COLLECTION OF DATA  
 
2.1. INTRODUCTION  
 
 This chapter deals with collection of data required for preparing DPRs for works of 
interception and diversion of drains and sewage treatment plants  of the project area . 
The DPR should be prepared on the basis of available data that has been generated by 
the concerned agencies.  Additional data  (primary data)  may be needed. It will have to be 
generated by undertaking suitable sur vey and investigation.  However, DPR should integrate 
all the data provided by agencies concerned for pollution abatement.  
 
2.2. PROJECT AREA  
 
As the DPR is for intercepting the drains and treating the diverted sewage, the project 
area for the purpose of the DPR is only that area of the town which is discharging into drains 
and contributing to the pollution of river and may not the whole town  within municipal limits .  
 
There may be towns where some areas outside the municipal limits are also discharging 
into drains of the town under consideration and subsequently polluting the river, but for some 
or the other reasons are not included within  its munici pal limits . These areas must also be 
considered as a part of the project area.  
 
It is therefore, of utmost importance to precisely demarcate the project area so as to 
correctly project design population, sewage flows and design proposed works. The project area 
under consideration should be clearly marked on a key plan of the town so that the area can be 
measured from the map.  
 
2.3. DATA REQUIRED  
 
The data needs to be gathered for the town whose wastewater is causing pollution of 
the river and for which the proje ct is to be prepared for abatement of pollution.  A town may 
have to be divided into a number of sewerage districts for getting optimal results and data 
gathered should meet this need .  
 
2.4. TOWN RELATED DATA  
 
2.4.1.  General Information of the town  
 
i. Location – Latitude, Longitude  
ii. Important features  
iii. Climate  
iv. Brief history of the city  
v. Commercial activities  
vi. Industrial activities  
vii. Educational activities  
viii. Cultural activities  
ix. Religious activities  
x. City development plan or city sanitation plan, if prepared, should be obtained.  
xi. Data on water supply as per para 2.4.6 ,  
 Page 6 xii. Project reports of sewerage and pollution works in the city executed, under 
execution and proposed for future should be obtained.  
xiii. Slum population and their development/rehabilitation plan.  
xiv. Communi ty toilets  
xv. Present sewerage management  including existing or proposed septic tanks, number 
of septic tanks and their maintenance scenario in the catchment such as septic tank 
sludge/septage treatment etc.  
xvi. Solid Waste Management (SWM) system.  
xvii. Areas within  and adjoining the town contributing to the pollution of river, its 
boundary and area  
xviii. HFL of the river at the sites of all infrastructure works proposed near the river   
xix. Minimum and maximum flow in the river, along with dates.  
 
2.4.2.  Maps  
 
Digital maps, as may be available, showing the following features on a scale large 
enough to understand the physical features may be prepared.  
 
i. Important land marks of the town  
ii. Rivers  
iii. Other water bodies  
iv. River banks where solid waste is dumped  
v. Drains, and points of their respective outfalls and catchments (drainage areas)  
vi. Surface utilities  
vii. Municipal wards  
viii. Open spaces  
ix. Residential areas  
x. Industrial estates  
xi. Industrial units outside industrial estates  
xii. Points of discharge of industrial effluents  
xiii. Slums  
xiv. Areas covered with septic tanks  
xv. Water supply system – Including intake points and ground water.  
xvi. Places used for open defecation  
xvii. Community toilets  
xviii. Existing sewers in each drainage area of the town with diameters and invert levels, 
if existing.  
xix. STPs and sewage pumping stations, if existing.  
xx. Points of discharge of treated effluents into the river and their distance from points 
of water supply intake works.  
xxi. Garbage dumping sites including land fills  
xxii. Bio-medical waste treatment facilities  
xxiii. Pollution abatement works carried out in the  past with details  
xxiv. Components of proposed works along with those of existing works, if any, are to 
be shown on maps with different colours and legends.  
xxv. Areas within  and adjoining the town contributing to the pollution of river, its 
boundary and area  
 
2.4.3.  Use of State of Art Tools Like Remote Sensing and GIS  
  
 Page 7 Maps of Survey of India may be used. If there are easily accessible facilities with the 
State Remote Sensing Centre or other specialized agencies, an attempt should be made to use 
remote sensing to gather spatial information observable from space and present it and other 
data mentioned above in Geographical Information System (GIS) format. It gives the ability to 
prepare maps on different themes as required. For cities with a population of one million or 
more the data must be presented in GIS format. For other cities it is optional.  
 
As expertise of this kind may not be generally available with the implementing 
agencies, the work may be done by hiring qualified experts for such purposes from outside. A 
good map depicting all the above features would help in improving decision making and 
finali zing appropriate sewerage routes without disturbing other civic utilities.  
 
2.4.4.  Status of  Sewerage Management Works Undertaken in the Past, if any  
 
In the past, some works related to pollution abatement and sewerage may have been 
planned and implemented, for which the following details may be collected:  
 
a. A note describing in brief history / details of sewer system introduced in the town, 
works carried out / under progress in different programmes, sanctioned cost, year of 
sanction, year of commissioning, brief details of works done such as SPS (with their 
diameters, details of pumps installed, rising mains, year of commissioning etc.), STPs 
(with their capacity, type, year of commissioning etc.), sewer network, other works , 
technical studies / condition assessment reports conducted in the past for assessing the 
condition of existing structures . 
b. Photographs of existing works  
c. Number of drains out falling into the river(s), nos. intercepted and diverted to STPs, 
copies of reports on discharge measurement and sewage quality of drains carried out in 
the past.  
d. Designed capacity/performance, present performance & O&M details  
e. A plan showing existing major works such as drains, SPS, rising mains, STPs and major 
trunk sewers etc.  
f. A separate plan of existing sewers showing diameters, lengths and RLs etc.  
g. Information re lating to existing sewage disposal works, Septic  tanks, existing STPs 
and drains intercepted may be presented in tables 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.  
h. Condition assessment of existing works: Condition assessment should invariably be 
carried out for all existing works. Normally this is carried out by destructive and or non -
destructive tests on structures and other works by qualified and experienced test houses 
and experts. For this draining out of the tanks, if required, may also be done so that the 
true assessment of li fe of works can be made. If the performance of the works is less 
than the designed one or that required at the end of the design period, the causes and 
remedial measures may be identified component wise  
1. Interception works  
2. Sewers  
3. SPS 
4. STPs  
5. Septic tanks  
 
Table 2. 1: Present Sewage Disposal System  
 
S. 
No. Waste water disposal 
works  Quantity  Future Plans  Remarks  
DA 1 DA 2 DAn  Total  
1 Interception works , nos.         
 Page 8 S. 
No. Waste water disposal 
works  Quantity  Future Plans  Remarks  
DA 1 DA 2 DAn  Total  
2 Sewers, kms        
3 SPS       
 Locations        
 Nos.       
4 STPs        
 Locations        
 Technology        
 Mld       
5 Septic tanks        
6 Others        
Note: DA stands for Drainage Area  
 
Table 2. 2: Details of existing STPs  
 
S.No   DA 1 DA 2 DAn  
1 Location (DA or ward)     
2 Operational Yes or No     
3 Process     
4 Installed Capacity, Mld     
5 Current Capacity, Mld     
 Desired capacity at the end of the design period     
6 Raw Sewage Design Parameters     
 BOD, mg/l     
 COD, mg/l     
 TSS, mg/l     
 NH 4-N mg/l     
 N-total, mg/l     
 Faecal coliform, MPN/100 Ml     
7 Treated Sewage Design Parameters     
 BOD, mg/l     
 COD, mg/l     
 TSS, mg/l     
 NH 4-N mg/l     
 N-total, mg/l     
 Faecal coliform, MPN/100 Ml     
8 Raw Sewage Actual  Parameters     
 BOD, mg/l     
 COD, mg/l     
 TSS, mg/l     
 NH 4-N mg/l     
 N-total, mg/l     
 Faecal coliform, MPN/100 Ml     
 Phosphorus mg/l     
 Sulphate mg/l     
9 Treated Sewage  Actual Parameters     
 BOD, mg/l      
 Page 9 S.No   DA 1 DA 2 DAn  
 COD, mg/l     
 TSS, mg/l     
 NH 4-N mg/l     
 N-total, mg/l     
 Faecal coliform, MPN/100 Ml     
 Additional parameters (i f there is a chance of 
industrial contamination).     
 Overall efficiency of STP     
10 Date of installation     
11 Condition of assets     
12 Operating agency and mode of O&M     
13 Mode of discharge of effluents     
14 Whether sewer tax imposed      
 
Table 2. 3: Status of interception of drains  
 
S. 
No. Drain 
number  Name of 
drain  Drain 
discharging into 
river --------  Intercepted and 
diverted to STP at  
-------- on ---- Status of 
interception 
works  
1 D1     
2 D2     
↓ ↓     
↓ ↓     
↓ ↓     
↓ ↓     
n Dn     
 
2.4.5.  Population of the Town  
 
Past Census Population of the town should be provided in the table 2.4.  
Table 2. 4: Census Population of the town during the last decades  
 
Year  No of 
wards  Area of 
town  No of houses 
including 
slums  Population  Growth 
rate Density of 
population 
no / sq. km  
1971        
1981        
1991        
2001        
2011        
 
2.4.6.  Water Supply  
  
 Status of present supply of water drain wise should be provided in table 2.5.  
 
Table 2. 5: Status of water supply in the town  / project area  
  
 Page 10 Items  Installed 
capacity, Mld  Water 
supplied, Mld  Remarks  
Sources of water supply     
Surface (Describe source wise)     
Tube wells (nos.)     
Hand Pumps (nos.)     
Total, Mld     
Private bore wells (nos.)     
Total including private bore wells, Mld     
Water supply  required for the town as per 
GoI guidelines , lpcd     
lpcd for which present water supply  project 
has been designed     
Base year Population of the town     
Water supplied  on base year population 
(excluding bore wells ), lpcd     
Water supply  on base year  population 
including bore wells, lpcd     
Plans for augmentation of water supply     
 
2.4.7.  Status of River  
 
i. Purposes for which river water is being used  
a. Drinking  
b. Irrigation  
c. Industry  
d. Navigation  
e. Other uses such as water sports, boating, etc.  
(State the location of the above works and show them in a map)  
 
ii. River Water Quality  
 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has classified all inland waters in five 
categories according to the designated – best - use class  (Table 3.1, Chapter 3) . The designated 
best use as well as actual quality of river water should be reported.  
 
Water quality of the river should be analysed at the following points:  
a. upstream of the city,  
b. downstream of the city  
c. downstream points of outfalls of major drains  
d. downstream points of outfalls of treated effluents of STPs  
e. upstream of intakes of waterwor ks.  
 
 The programme aims at improving the river water quality to Class B for outdoor 
bathing. Though, pH, Dissolved Oxygen (DO), Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), and 
Total coliform organisms have been prescribed as water quality parameters for Class B, for 
actua l base line data water quality monitoring should be done following the “Uniform Protocol 
on Water Quality Monitoring Order, 2005”. The relevant order is attached as Annexure III. The 
towns may be treated as Trend or impact or flux stations .  Ideally, the re should be a report for  
 Page 11 every month, in all 12 reports. But for the purpose of this programme, the parameters such as pH, 
BOD, DO, FC and TC prescribed for water quality of the river for bathing, may be monitored 
quarterly  and the remaining parameters may be monitored pre -monsoon once a year.  
 
 Water quality monitoring is necessary to assess the current water quality and the extent 
of improvement that can be achieved through interventions proposed in the DPR. The sampling 
for water quality should be fro m well -mixed section of the river or main stem 30 cm below the 
water surface to represent accurate impact. Copies of laboratory test reports should be made a 
part of DPR  
 
Water quality of the river may be presented as given in table 2.6  
 
Table 2. 6: Water quality of river  
Month: ………………….  
Parameters  u/s of 
town  d/s of 
town  d/s of 
outfall 
of major 
drain  *downstream of 
outfalls of 
treated 
effluents of 
STPs  *upstream 
of intakes of 
waterworks  At 
important  
ghats  
pH       
Biological 
Oxygen 
Demand (BOD)        
Dissolved 
Oxygen (DO)        
Faecal 
Coliforms        
Total Coliforms        
       
Colour        
Odour        
Temperature        
Electrical 
Conductivity 
(EC)        
Turbidity        
Total Dissolved 
Solids (TDS)        
Ammoniacal 
Nitrogen  
(NH 4-N)       
Nitrite & Nitrate 
Nitrogen  
(NO 2 + NO 3)       
Total Phosphate 
(Total P)        
Chemical 
Oxygen 
Demand (COD)         
 Page 12 Parameters  u/s of 
town  d/s of 
town  d/s of 
outfall 
of major 
drain  *downstream of 
outfalls of 
treated 
effluents of 
STPs  *upstream 
of intakes of 
waterworks  At 
important  
ghats  
       
*Required to view the impact of discharge of treated sewage into surface water to be used as 
source of drinking water d/s.  
 
 In addition to parameters mentioned in the above table,  other parameters prescribed 
under Uniform Protocol (Pesticides, toxic metals, major ions) may be  included, if required, 
depending upon site conditions. If any secondary data is available from the St ate Pollution 
Control Board (SPCB) or the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) , that too should be 
reported.  Report on Pollution Assessment: River Ganga July 2013 published by CPCB carries 
spatial distribution of water quality data w.r.t. DO, BOD, Faeca l coliform, Total Coliform and 
Conductivity for the period 2011 at various places in the country. Data if available for the town, 
may also be extracted from the said report and presented in the DPR.  Comments on river water 
flows and quality on the basis of  the above shall also be given.   
 
2.4.8.  Sewage Generation  
 
Quantity and quality of sewage generated in a town carried by the drains untreated into 
the river and by sewers to STP(s) for treatment need to be measured and tested.  
 
2.4.8.1. Volume of Sewage Generated  
 
A note and a plan showing the names of drains, discharge carried by them, location 
points of their outfalls into the water body, points of their interception and STPs into which 
diverted should be prepared.  
 
Actual present flows should be recorded three t imes: Pre -monsoon, during monsoon 
and after monsoon. If this is not feasible, flows may be recorded in dry weather before the point 
of outfall into the water body for at least one month.  Samples should be taken on a day in every  
week for diurnal variation on hourly basis  for twenty four hours . Considering a four -week 
month, three sample days are to be taken on weekdays, whereas the fourth one on an off day 
i.e. Sunday.  
 
If the drain has been intercepted for treating the sewage, t he discharge diverted to the 
STP should be measured. Data on the flows measured in the past should also be collected and 
reported.  
 
Details of the quantity of sewage reaching STPs through sewers may be collected from 
the records of STPs for the last 3 years. In the absence of records, the same may be measured 
in dry weather.  
 
Details of flows may be provided as in tables 2.7 and 2.8.  
 
Table 2. 7: Discharge carried by drains as measured on ---- 
  
 Page 13 Drain Name and No.:  
Method of Measurement: Float Method/Current Metter/V -notch, Rect. Notch/Other:  
Season:  
Place/Location of measurement:  
Global Positioning:  
Name o f the outfall point:  
Date of 
measuremen
t Week 
of the 
month  Day of 
the week 
(e.g. 
Monday)  Time  Av. 
Discharge  Remark  
8:00 
am 9:00 
am 10:00 
am 11:00 
am 12:00 
noon  1:00 
pm 2:00 
pm 3:00 
pm 4:00 
pm 5:00 
pm 6:00 
pm 7:00 
pm 8:00 
pm cusec  mld  
 I *Mon -
Sat.                 
 II *Mon -
Sat.                 
 III *Mon -
Sat.                 
 IV **Sunday                  
              Average     
*Any day between Monday to Saturday  
**The last & IV measurement should be taken on Sunday only.  
Copies of flow measurement reports need to be made a part of DPR.  
 
Summary of flows carried by drains  
 
Flow carried by each drain be summarized in table ----, showing average, peak and non peak 
flow 
 
Table  2.8:  Actual a verage, peak and non peak flow carried by drains  
 
SN Name of Drain  Flow carried by drain  
  Date  Average 
Flow, Mld  Peak Flow, 
Mld Non Peak 
Flow, Mld  
      
      
      
  
Table 2. 8: Daily Incoming Discharge at STPs installed and functioning --- 
 
No/Name 
of STP  Daily (Monthly Average)  
Incoming  raw sewage at STP , Mld  Average 
Inflow, 
Mld Jan     Dec 
1        
        
n        
Note:  
1. The date / method of measurement of incoming flows should specifically be mentioned.  
2. Copies of flow measurement reports / log books of STP need to be made a part of DPR.  
 
2.4.8.2. Measurement of Flows in Existing Drains/Sewers  
 
The assessment of the flows in drains can be done by a variety of methods right from 
the rudimentary crude method to the most sophisticated dye tracer method. The choice of 
methods presented hereunder is considered to be appropriate to the conditions in the country 
particularly, away from metropolitan centres.   
 Page 14  
Measurement of flows may be carried out as described in para 3.10 of CPHEEO 
Sewerage Manual No v 2013 and reproduced as below. The float measurement is normally not 
recommended for discharge measurement due to its large uncertainty . However, it may be 
adopted in consultation with NMCG under  some exceptional situations , justification for which 
may be provided . 
 
a) The Float Method  
 
In this method, surface velocity of flow of the drain is worked out by the time taken by a float 
like an empty match -box or a plastic box to travel for about 3 m in a straight reach and flow 
is calculated by measuring the depth and flow in the drain.  
b) The V notch method  
 
Preferably, V -notch method should be used up to discharge of 20 Mld. This requires the 
insertion of a V notch plate in the drain at a location where the downstream discharge can be a 
free fall. These pla tes can be cut out from stainless steel (SS) or Teflon sheets of nominal 
thickness of about 2 mm and inserted tightly into the drain and the gaps can be closed by a 
mixture of clay and cement in equal proportion mixed to a thick consistency and smeared on 
the downstream side. The V notch is the best chosen such that the angle subtended is 90 
degrees. The clearances to be ensured are shown in Figure 1.  
 
Fig. 1: Typical mounting of a V Notch in a drain  
 
The depth of flow is measured over the lower tip of the V bottom and the discharge is  
 
Q = 1.42 × tan of angle of V notch × H power 2.5  
 
As the angle is 90 degrees, the tangent is equal to 1 and hence, the equation simplifies to  
 
Q=1.42× H power 2.5  
 
Where Q is cum/sec and H is in m  
 
 
 Page 15 c) The rectangular weir method  
 
This can be used if there is already an existing leveled  overflow weir like the overflow 
culverts in irrigation canals. In smaller drains and in places where workmanship of V notch 
cuts are dif ficult, these can be used easily by cutting a mild steel or wood sheet as shown in 
Figure 2.  
This method may be used for discharge s more than 20 Mld. 
 
Fig. 2: Typical mounting of a rectangular weir in a drain  
 
The depth of flow is measured over the overflow edge of the notch and the discharge is  
 
Q = 1.85 × L × H power 1.5  
 
Where,  
Q is cum/sec,  
H is in m,  
L is the length of weir  
 
d) The rectangular weir with end contractions method  
 
These are similar to the re ctangular weir except that the length of the weir is smaller than 
the width of the drain as in Figure 3 -3 overleaf.  
 
The depth of flow is measured over the overflow edge of the notch and the discharge is  
 
Q = 1.85 × (L − 0.2H) × H power 1.5  
Where  
Q is cum/sec,  
H is in m,  
L is the length of weir  
 
 Page 16  
Fig. 3: Typical mounting of a rectangular weir with end constrictions in a drain  
 
e) The Palmer -Bowlus Flume  
 
This can be used in case of both the drains and pipes flowing under gravity. Its major 
advantages are (i) less energy loss; (ii) minimal restriction to flow and (iii) Easy installation in 
existing conduits. It is a readymade piece for various widths and diameters. The placement in 
a drain will be as in Figure 4 and that in  a sewer pipe will be as in Figure 5 overleaf.  
 
 
 
Fig. 4: Palmer -Bowlus flume installation in drains  
 
 
 Page 17  
Fig. 5: Palmer -Bowlus flume installation in circular sewer  
 
This has the specific advantage of its ability to be placed in a manhole to measure the 
sewage flow in the gravity sewer as long as the flow is not exceeding the diameter of the sewer. 
Typical installation details are seen in Figure 6 overleaf.  
 
The depth of flow needs to be measured in only on e location and thus it is a lot easier. 
In addition, it can be easily removed after measurement. The only disadvantage is it cannot be 
used when the depth of flow exceeds the diameter of the sewer and to this extent, it may have 
limitations in the surcharg ed condition of sewers in historical cities. This also has the advantage 
of facilitating a flow measurement in large diameter sewers, which flow under gravity and the 
flume itself is much simpler as in Figure 7.  
 
The chart for getting at the flow once the  depth is measured is obtained by relating to a 
standard curve supplied by the plume manufacturer depending on the shape of the plume. This 
is also available as software linked to a personal computer.  
 
The combination of the Palmer -Bowlus and Tracer dye te chniques have been reported 
as early as 1974 as illustrated in Figure 7. It is a system worth inducting in large trunk sewers 
near the outfalls to have an integrated measurement of the flows and key quality parameters or 
at least for the flow details and v ariation patterns.  
 
 
 Page 18   
  
  
Top Left and Right - The installation in manholes by inserting the pipe ends into the sewer 
and measuring the depth of flow by ultrasonic sensor to integrate to a computer as needed.  
Bottom left - The Flume, originally invented by Palmer &Bowlus for the Los Angeles County 
Sanitation District and in use for over three decades, is made by many manufacturers.  
Bottom Right - The installation, in a large circular sewer by merely placing the readymade 
flume at the invert and measurement of the depth, which can be done by ultrasonic sensor.  
 
Fig. 6: Configuration and use of Palmer -Bowlus flume  
 
 
Source: J. Marsalek, 1974  
 
 
 Page 19 Fig. 7: Instrumentation for flow measurement and sampling in urban large conduits  
 
f) The Venturi Pipe or the Dall Tube  
 
While dealing with old pumping mains, there is a chance of detecting a venturi pipe fitting 
in the pipeline, as was the standard practice in those  years. The flow through it is a function of 
the difference in head of the fluid at the mouth and the throat and the formula for a given venturi 
metre is very simple as  
 
Q = K × (a1 x a2) (factor)  
factor = SQRT (2gh/(a1 2-a22)) 
 
Where  
K = 0.95 to 0.98  
a1 = area in sqm at mouth  
a2 = area in sqm at throat  
h = h1 -h2 
h1 = piezometric water level in m at mouth  
h2 = piezometric water level in m at throat  
 
It is thus clear that once the difference in head is measured between sewage pressure 
head at mouth and at throat, the square root of the same is directly proportional to the flow. It 
is possible to connect a differential Mercury manometer to the sampling ports in the metre and 
open the quarter turn -cock when flow needs to be measured and to note the reading. A simple 
wall chart relating the difference to the flow will be more than needed. Of course, 
instrumentation is possible by connecting the two pressur es to a differential pressure 
transmitter and taking its output to a square root extractor and then to a multiplier for the 
constant for the metre and thereby get a continuous reading of the flow without any 
interventional systems.  
 
Suffice to say that so  far as estimation of flows for design of sewer systems or 
augmentation of sewer systems are concerned, where an existing pumping station with a 
venturimeter in the delivery main is available, a simple mercury manometer U tube, connected 
to the ports of th e venturi meter may help in ascertaining the variation of the flow pattern and 
arrive at peak flow factors etc. more realistically.  
 
A Dall tube is nothing but a venturi pipe -fitting of a reduced length and as otherwise all 
other properties of flow measur ements are the same.  
 
In fact, if possible this can be inserted into an existing pumping main for the evaluation 
of the above flow patterns.  
 
g) Salt Dilution method  
 
May be used for lower range of flows in the drains up to 6 m3/s in the hills where flow 
is highly turbulent and is difficult to measure by other methods. In this method, the tracer i.e. 
common salt and other chemicals is injected at some point along the stream, and the tracer 
concentration in streamwater is measured  at a downstream point by an electrical conductivity 
meter, where the tracer has become uniformly mixed with the streamwater.  The probe of 
conductivity meter should be immersed, close to the bed of the stream or ideally at the mid - 
 Page 20 depth. After injecting th e salted water, the salt starts spreading itself out while travelling 
downstream. At a certain point downstream it will have filled the width of the stream. For a 
given volume or rate of injection, greater stream discharges will result in greater tracer di lution 
and lower concentrations measured at the downstream site. Equations based on the mass 
balance principle are applied to compute the stream discharge.  
 
The method of flow is easy to accomplish, accurate (< ±7%), and reliable for a wide 
range of stream types. Using this method, stream flow can be measured in less than 10 minutes 
and very little equipment is needed. The total streamflow, assuming that the streamflow was 
constant over the test, is  
 
𝑄=𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠  𝑜𝑓 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑡
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟  ×𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎  𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟  𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑣𝑒 
 
2.4.8.3. Characteristics of Raw Sewage  
 
The characteristics  of raw sewage carried by the drains / reaching STPs may vary from 
town to town depending upon rate of water supply, per capital pollution load and prevailing 
socio -economic conditions. The values should be collected from recent records or tested in dry 
weather (pre -monsoon).  
 
Samples should be analysed for the parameters prescribed in para 5.1.14 of CPHEEO 
Manual and the following table . 
 
Samples for testing water quality should be composite and flow proportional, taken on 
a day in every  week for diurnal variation on hourly basis from the existing drain or sewage 
outfall. Considering a four -week month, three sample days are to be weekdays, wh ereas the 
fourth is to be an off day i.e. Sunday.  
 
Sampling for water quality should be conducted for at least one month during dry 
weather (pre -monsoon) to assess pollution load quantitatively and qualitatively. Water quality 
of the drain should be monito red just before its outlet into the river.  The test report should 
indicate the time of drawing sample and its testing.  
 
This information may be provided in table 2.9.  
 
Table 2. 9: Raw Sewage Characteristics, as measured on ----. 
 
*Parameters  Monitoring Sites of Drains / Inlet to STPs  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
pH          
Temperature           
Colour           
Odour           
Alkalinity, mg/l           
TSS          
Volatile SS           
BOD, Total           
BOD, Filtered            
 Page 21 *Parameters  Monitoring Sites of Drains / Inlet to STPs  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
COD, Total           
COD, Filtered           
Nitrogen, NH 3          
Nitrogen, TKN           
Nitrogen, NO 3          
Phosphorus (Ortho -P)          
Phosphorus (T -P)          
Total Coliform           
Faecal Coliform           
TDS           
Chloride           
Sulphates           
Additional parameters if there 
is a chance of industrial 
contamination in the town or the 
catchment of a drain)           
Heavy metals  (for industries 
likemetal plating, dying, leather 
etc.) 
The choice of heavy metals to be 
tested will depend on the kind of 
industrial units  
          
Pesticides  
(For industries like food 
processing, pesticide etc.)           
Organo Chlorines           
Organo Phosphates           
Carbamates           
Detergents  
(For industries like soap etc.)           
Other parameters           
Depending on type of industry           
          
* Source: Para 5.1.14 of CPHEEO Manual Nov  
 
 
2.4.8.4. Pollution from commercial, industrial and agricultural activities.  
 
 Broad raw water quality parameters that need to be tested have been listed in table 2.10. 
However, typical waste compounds produced by commercial, and agricultural activities and 
specific industrial activities are available in Wastewater Engineering Treatment and Reuse 
standard text books authored by like Metcalf  and Eddy. Depending on the nature of activity 
that is undertaken in the town, appropriate parameters may be monitored in the water samples 
drawn from the drain or the river.  
  
 Page 22  Data related to industrial waste water, points of discharge into the sewer network/drains  
etc. may also be provided by the CPCB/SPCB/concerned Govt. body.  
 
The effluent from slaughter houses contains high BOD (1000 to 4000 mg/l), COD 
(2000 to 10,000 mg/l)), SS (200 to 1500 mg/l), total dissolved solids (4000 to 5500 mg/l), high 
oil and grease, high chloride from skins, etc. If it is suspected that wastewater from any 
slaughter house may reach a drain or the river, attention should be paid to monitoring of the 
above water quality parameters and changes in their values should be looked for.  
 
The mixing of industrial effluents with domestic sewage adversely  affects  the sewage 
treatment process. In such cases,  necessary corrective / enabling actions may be adopted and 
the flow parameters should be measured accordingly before finalizing the STP technology.  
 
2.4.8.5. Raw Sewage Characteristics for newly developed areas and in the absence of 
drain or outfall  
 
 For ne wly developed areas and in the absence of drain or outfall discharging in to the 
river, raw sewage characteristics may be adopted from the table 2.10 or preferably actual 
measurements from nearby town(s) having similar rate of water supply and socioeconomi c 
conditions. Table has been prepared with the rate of water supply as 135 lpcd and may be 
revised depending on rate of water supply.  
 
Table 2. 10: Concentration of various parameters in the absence of drain or outfall  
 
Item  Per capita 
contribution  
g/c/d  Water 
supply  
lpcd Sewage 
Generation  
80% of (3)  Concentration  
mg/l  
1 2 3 4 5 
BOD  27.0 135*  108 250.0  
COD  45.9 135 108 425.0  
TSS 40.5 135 108 375.0  
VSS 28.4 135 108 262.5  
Total Nitrogen  5.4 135 108 50.0 
Organic 
Nitrogen  1.4 135 108 12.5 
Ammonia 
Nitrogen  3.5 135 108 32.5 
Nitrate Nitrogen  0.5 135 108 5.0 
Total 
Phosphorous  0.8 135 108 7.1 
Ortho 
Phosphorous  0.5 135 108 5.0 
Source: Para 5.1.14 / Table 5.4 of CPHEEO Manual 2013  
Table may be revised based on rate of water supply  
 
2.4.9.  Soil Investigations  
 
For laying deep sewers, soil investigation and test bores must be made at suitable 
intervals along the alignment of sewers to ascertain the type of soil at different depths and  
 Page 23 behaviour of ground water table and bearing capacity of the soil. For deep sewer laying, 
wherever required, a mechanical system may be proposed as a safety and speedy measure.  
 
Soil investigation should be carried out at all major sites such as deep sewer s, SPS, 
STPs and for locations such as flood plains, landfill sites and locations having dispersive soil 
characteristics.  
 
Soil investigation report should include soil description, characteristics , bearing 
capacity etc.  HFL at the disposal point is also to be provided in the DPR.  
 
2.4.10.  Ground Water Investigations:  
 
The information about groundwater levels and their fluctuation should be obtained 
along the river bank where the interception sewer is to be laid. The levels should be recorded 
pre monsoon and just after the monsoon when the levels are the highest.  
 
2.5. SOURCES OF DATA  
 
The following sources may provide the needed information:   
 
i. State Pollution Control Board and the Central Pollution Control Board.  
ii. Executive Engineer of Water Resources department in the District maintains 
information about drainage basins and rivers in his district.  
iii. District planning office  
iv. District officers of agriculture, forests etc.  
v. Survey of India topographical sheets  
vi. India Met eorological Department  
vii. State Remote Sensing Agency  
viii. District Census Office  
ix. For flora and fauna Botanical Survey of India, Zoological Survey of India, State 
Pollution Control Board / Central Pollution Control Board and (local University 
in case any research  has been done).  
x. Urban Local Body  
xi. CGWB / State GWBs; State UDD; NIC cell at State / District level; PHED/            
Water & Sewerage Board/Authority  
xii. CWC / State Water Resources Department about the flows in the river.  
  
 Page 24 CHAPTER 3: PREPARATION OF DETAILED PROJECT REPORT  
 
 The DPR shall be prepared to achieve clearly spelt objective and outcome in terms of 
abatement of pollution from the drains carrying waste water of the town and improving water 
quality of the river to mak e it suitable for bathing.  
 
3.1 OBJECTIVES OF DPRAND OUTCOME  
 
The objective is to prepare a project report for constructing Interception and Diversion 
works of drains including Trunk Sewers and Sewage Pumping Stations and Sewage Treatment 
Plants in an optimal manner so that the wastewater from the town carried by the  drains is treated 
to the desired standards before it is discharged into the river.  
 
The expected outcome from the implementation of the DPR is that the water quality of 
the river should be improved to satisfy the standards prescribed for the best designa ted use of 
the river as prescribed by the CPCB  and thus make it suitable for the best designated use 
(bathing in this case).  
 
3.2 DESIGNS  
 
 Detailed designs and engineering of the works shall be based on extensive survey and 
investigation and collection of the  required data. In data collection, their analysis, design and 
implementation of the DPR, the relevant provisions of the CPHEEO Manual on Sewerage and 
Sewage Treatment Systems, Nov 2013( http://moud.gov.in/sewerage ) may be followed. In the 
event of absence of guideline in the manual on a particular aspect, relevant specifications of 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), standard books, State / CPWD manuals may be followed . 
Highest Flood Level s (HFL) of drains /Nala/ Rivers  should  be considered for designing the interception 
works/ Sewage pumping station s (SPS)/Sewage treatment plant s (STP s). 
 
 An integrated and comprehensive scheme of management of wastewater in the town 
will include other aspects such as covering all the lo calities with sewers and connecting every 
household to it, dealing with non -point sources of pollution, solid waste management etc. These 
Guidelines deal with the preparation of a part, though a major part, of the Integrated Scheme. 
Thus the interception a nd diversion sewers, sewage pumping stations and sewage treatment 
plants proposed under this DPR would ultimately become a part of the town’s integrated and 
comprehensive system of dealing with wastewater. This aspect should be kept in mind while 
designing  the infrastructure  works . The sizes and invert levels of different components shall, 
therefore, be provided accordingly and for the needs of the next 30 years.  
 
For  a town that is sewered, even if partly, the existing Master Plan of sewerage of the 
town, sewerage zones, designs of trunk sewers, locations of sewage pumping stations and STPs 
will need to be referred to in order to determine the invert levels of Div ersion Sewers now 
being proposed.  
 
In case of towns with no sewerage system and no sewerage plan, ideally it would be 
desirable to prepare the Master Plan for sewerage, if not prepared earlier and carry out the 
design of sewerage network of sewers. Howeve r, in case it is not feasible or practical for any 
reason to prepare a master plan of sewerage, it is necessary to ensure that in the future when a 
comprehensive sewerage plan of the town is prepared and implemented, the proposed works 
that will come up th en will be in consonance with the diversion works that are being planned  
 Page 25 now. For this purpose, topography of the area, gradient, obstructions, levels of the localities 
need to be ascertained and mapping using total station and GIS.  
 
3.3 DEVELOPING OPTIONS FOR THE SCHEMES  
 
3.3.1 Utilising an existing system  
  
 In drainage areas and districts where there is an existing system of interception and 
diversion of waste water from drains, their (existing system’s) status may be presented on a 
plan and in the form of a note stating the components, their details and cond ition etc.  
 
3.3.2 Condition assessment  
 
The condition of every component of the system should invariably be assessed for their  
status, designed performance, present performance, designed capacity and present capacity and 
useful life left, and whether they shoul d be repaired, refurbished, upgraded or modernized. If 
it is found that the system can be brought to a to a degree that the waste water satisfies the 
prescribed standards by the time it reaches the river , items of work that are needed should be 
identified  and details worked out and costs estimated. Existing sewerage works should be 
dovetailed with the proposed scheme.  
 
3.3.3 Alternatives  
 
Alternative  systems if I&D and STPs, keeping in view the location of drains and 
availability of land for construction of sewage pumping stations and STPs, should be developed 
so that the optimal system may be adopted and accordingly DPR prepared.  
 
i. Centralised System  
 
 The wastewater from all the drains is intercepted in a sewer and conveyed to a 
centralised STP for treatment from where it could be suitably disposed of into the river or used 
for irrigation, or, locating the STP further away where land is available at c heaper rates and 
cheaper technology can be adopted. In this approach the sizes and length of sewers would be 
relatively large and the STPs also would need to have much larger capacity. Such a system is 
useful in towns where it is difficult to get the neede d land at one place. In this system, the 
sewers may have to be laid over a long distance involving high costs.  
 
ii. Decentralised System  
 
 As opposed to the Centralised System in which all the wastewater of a town is treated 
at a single point STP, in a decent ralised system the entire town is divided in to convenient 
areas. The wastewater of one area is taken to a point where it is treated in STP. The division of 
areas is done on the basis of topography and overall cost of I&D including treatment. In such 
a sys tem, wastewater flowing in one or, sometimes more than one drains , is intercepted and 
carried in sewer(s) to treatment plant(s ) near  to their outfalls. In the decentralised approach, 
sizes of sewers and STPs would be smaller involving lower capital cost. T he staff requirement 
is more and the land required would be at a number of places.  
 
3.3.4 Techno Economic Evaluation  
  
 Page 26 Techno -economic evaluation should be done for each alternative. Economic evaluation 
should be carried out on life cycle analysis of major components. This analysis should include 
cost of implementation, capitalised annual O&M cost less revenue from resourc e recovery, 
recycling and by -product utilization and cost of mitigation of any adverse environmental 
impacts, Interest on borrowed capital, debt servicing charges & depreciation provisions should 
also be taken into consideration to arrive at the Net Presen t Values (NPV).  
 
Technological evaluation may include ability of the proposed system to achieve the 
desired outcomes, ease of O&M, time required to implement the project, likely adverse 
environmental impacts and the feasibility of undertaking measures to mitigate them . The 
quality  of human and physical resources required, electrical and other forms of energy needed, 
other pros and coins, reliability and long term sustainability should also be given appropriate 
weightages.  
 
On such an evaluation, the best o ption should be selected.  
 
3.4 RIVER WATER QUALITY  
 
3.4.1 Water Quality Standards for Rivers as per CPCB  
 
The classification of Designated - Best - Use of inland surface water as stipulated by 
CPCB is given in table 3.1.  
 
Table 3. 1: River Classification Based on Designated Best Use  
 
Designated – Best - 
Use Class of 
Water  Criteria  Prescribed Value  
Drinking Water Source  
without conventional  
treatment but after  
disinfection  A Total coliforms organism  
pH  
Dissolved oxygen 
Biochemical oxygen 
demand 5 days 20°C  50 MPN/ 100 ml or less  
Between 6.5 and 8.5  
6mg/l or more  
2mg/l or less  
Outdoor bathing 
(Organised)  B Total coliforms organism  
pH  
Dissolved oxygen  
Biochemical oxygen 
demand 5 days  20°C  500 MPN/ 100 ml or less  
Between 6.5 and 8.5  
5 mg/l or more  
3 mg/l or less  
Drinking Water source 
after conventional  
treatment and  
disinfection  C Total coliforms organism  
pH  
Dissolved oxygen  
Biochemical oxygen 
demand 5 days  20°C  5000 MPN/ 100 ml or less  
Between  6 to 9  
4 mg/l or more  
3 mg/l or less  
Propagation of Wild 
life 
and Fisheries  D pH  
Dissolved oxygen  
Free ammonia (as N)  Between 6.5 and 8.5  
4 mg/l or more  
1.2mg/l or less  
Irrigation, Industrial  
Cooling, Controlled  
Waste disposal  E pH between  
Electrical conductivity  
at 25oC  
Sodium absorption Ratio  
Boron  Between 6.0 and 8.5  
Max 2250 micro mhos/cm  
 
Max 26  
Max 2mg/l   
 Page 27 Designated – Best - 
Use Class of 
Water  Criteria  Prescribed Value  
 Below E  Not meeting A, B, C, D & E 
Criteria   
Source: CPCB  
 
 
3.4.2 Actual Water Quality of the River  
 
Data collected on river water quality as discussed in Chapter 2 of these guide lines shall 
be commented upon and tabulated here.   
 
3.5 DESIGN PERIODS  
 
Design periods for sewerage mains and STPs have been often debated due to cost 
considerations. Keeping in vi ew the resource constraints and optimum utilization of assets, a 
modular approach may be followed for the different components of the system.  
 
The year of expected commissioning of the project shall be taken as the base year for 
design of various component s of all projects. The base year may be taken as three (3) years 
later from the year of preparation of the DPR. Design periods of various components , as 
prescribed by CPHEEO Sewerage Manual, 2013 are as  given below in table 3. 2. 
 
Table 3. 2: Design Periods  
S. 
No. Component  Design period,  
from base year  Design Period*  
Years (from base year)  
1 Land acquisition  30 years or more  Land will be required to add STP 
modules later. Accordingly land 
should be acquired.  
2 Interceptions  30 Years   
3 Conventional sewers (A)  30 Years   
4 Non - conventional sewers (B)  15 Years   
5 Pumping Mains  30 Years  In case of low velocities, dual 
pumping  mains to be examined  
6 Pumping Stations – 
 civil works  30 Years  Cost of civil works  is economical 
for full design period.  
7 Pumps & Machineries  15 Years  Considering modular approach  
 
8 Sewage Treatment Plants  15 Years  Construction may be done with a 
modular approach in a phased 
manner as the population grows.  
9 Effluent disposal  30 Years  Provision of design capacities in 
the initial stages itself is 
economical  
 
10 Effluent Utilization  30 Years  15 years or as the case may be  
(A) Typical underground sewers with manholes laid in the roads  
(B) All types such as small bore, shallow sewers, pressure sewers, vacuum sewers  
  
 Page 28 *Source: Table 2 -1 of CPHEEO Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems, Nov 
2013  and Table 5.1, Guide Lines for preparation of Project Reports under NRCP and NGRBA, 
Dec 2010.  
 
3.6 FUTURE POPULATION  
 
 Correct and realistic projections of population for design of various components must 
be done to optimize costs. Floating population in respect of cities having cultural, tourism or 
religious importance may be considered judiciously and basis for the same be given.  
 
3.6.1 Census Population  
 
Population should be collected from past census records up to  the year 2011 . In case 
ULB is established  after 1971, respective rural population of the geographical boundary of the 
ULB should be considered for this purpose.  
 
Data collected on past census population, as discussed in Chapter 2 of these guide lines, 
shall be commented upon and tabulated here.   
 
There may be towns where the whole area / population with in municipal limits is not 
contributing to pollution of the r iver. As the DPR is for intercepting the drains and treating the 
diverted sewage, it is of utmost importance to precisely consider the population of the area 
contributing to flows in drains, for projecting design population and sewage flows.  
 
On the other  hand, there may be towns where some areas outside the municipal limits 
are disc harging into drains of the town , but for some or the other reasons are not included with 
in municipal limits . Such areas may also be considered as a part of the project area.  
 
3.6.2 Future Population Projections  
 
The base year shall be taken as year of completion of the project  for which the DPR is 
being prepared. Population projections for the base, after 10 years, mid and design years shall 
be made considering the past decadal growt hs using different recognized methods such as:   
 
a. Arithmetical increase method   
b. Incremental increase method  
c. Geometrical increase method  
d. Decreasing rate of growth  
e. Graphical projection method  
f. Logistic method  
g. Land use and future density method  - This shall be carried out at micro level for 
individual wards depending upon the growth potential of individual wards in 
consultation with local body, development authority (if any) and city country planning 
department .   
 
Future population, which appears to be more realistic and acceptable, shall be adopted 
by giving proper justification for the same.  
 
3.6.3 Floating population  
  
 Page 29 Floating population should also be considered, which includes number of persons 
visiting the project area for tourism, pilgrimage or for working. The numbers should be decided 
in consultation with the tourism departments and specified for water supply and sewerage. 
Equivalent permanent population shall be worked out in proportion to the rate of water supply 
required for floating and permanent population.  
 
3.6.4 Unauthorized Population:  
 
In major cities, slum areas ,   unauthorized colonies, houses  and establishments  have 
been generating substantial amount of wastewater. Population of such areas should also be 
considered during estimation of population and  sewage generation.  
 
3.6.5 Design Population adopted  (including floating population)  
 
Design p opulation shall be adopted as a sum of permanent and equivalent floating and 
unauthorized population and shall be given for base year, 10, 15, 30 years . In case the town has 
been divided into a number of sewerage zones, design population in different years shall als o 
be given zone wise.  
 
3.7 RATE OF WATER SUPPLY  
 
3.7.1 Required rate of water supply, as per CPHEEO Manual  
 
As per CPHEEO Manual on Water Supply and Treatment 1999, the recommended 
values of water supply for domestic and non -domestic purposes are given in table 3. 3. 
 
Table 3. 3: Recommended Per Capita Water Supply Levels for Designing Schemes  
 
S. 
No. Classification of towns / cities  Recommended Maximum 
Water Supply Levels (lpcd)  
1. Towns provided with piped water supply but without 
sewerage system  70 
2. Cities provided with piped water supply where 
sewerage system is existing/ contemplated  135 
3. Metropolitan and Mega cities provided with piped 
water supply where sewerage system is existing/ 
contemplated   
150 
NOTE:  
1. In urban areas,  where water is provided through public stand posts, 40 lpcd should be 
considered .    
2. Figures exclude “unaccounted for water (UFW), which should be limited to 15%.  
3. Figures include requirements of water for commercial, institutional and minor industries. 
However, bulk supply to such establishments should be assessed separately with proper 
justification.  
Source: Table 2.1 of CPHEEO Manual on Water Supply and Treatment , May 1999  
 
3.7.2 Rate of water supply required for institutions  
  
 Page 30 The water requirements for institutions should be provided in addition to the provisions 
indicated in para above, where required, if they are of considerable magnitude and not covered 
in the provisions already made. The individual requirements would be as per table 3. 4:  
 
Table  3.4: Water Supply Requirements for Institutional Needs  
 
S.No. Institutions  
 Litres per head per day  
1 Hospital (including laundry )  
 (a) No. of beds exceeding 100  450 (per bed)  
 (b) No. of beds not exceeding 100  340 (per bed)  
2 Lodging houses / Hotels  180 (per bed)  
3 Lodging houses / Hostels  135 
4 Nurses’ homes and medical quarters  135 
5 Boarding schools / colleges  135 
6 Restaurants  70 (per seat)  
7 Air ports and sea ports , duty staff  70 
8 Airports and sea ports, alighting and 
boarding persons  15 
9 Junction stations and intermediate 
stations where mail or express 
stoppage (both railways and bus 
stations) is provided , duty staff  70 
10 Terminal station s 45 
11 Intermediate stations (excluding mail 
and expres s stops)  45 
(could be reduced to 25 where 
bathing facilities are not provided)  
12 Train and Bus stations, alighting and 
boarding persons  15 
13 Day schools / colleges  45 
14 Offices  45 
15 Factories , duty staff  45 
(could be reduced to 30 where no 
bathrooms are provided)  
16 Cinema, concert halls and theatre  15 
Source:  Para 2.2.8.3 of CPHEEO Manual on Water Supply and Treatment, May 1999  
and Table 3.4 CPHEEO Sewerage Manual 2013  
 
 
3.7.3 Status of Existing Water Supply  in the project area  
 
Status of existing water supply shall be prepared as stated in para 2. 4.6 and table 2.5 . 
 
It shall be ensured that the existing water supply or that proposed to be added by projects 
under execution, has the potential to meet the water demand of the projected design population 
at the rate specified in the above table. Details of projects (such as estimated cost, source of 
water, year of sanction/completion, brief details of works, lpcd proposed, design population 
etc.) which have been taken up or are contemplated for augmentation of water supply should 
be given.   
 Page 31  
3.7.4 Rate of water supply adopted  
 
Rate of water supply adopted for design purposes should  be mentioned, keeping in view 
the existing water supply, plans for augmentation and required for the project, giving  full 
justification of the same.  
 
3.8 INTERCEPTION FACTOR  
 
The observed dry weather flow reaching the sewer system is less than that of the per 
capita water supply due to loss of some water in leakage and evaporation. It varies from 40% 
of water supplied in arid regions to 90% in well developed areas. For design p urposes, 
interception factor or return factor may be adopted as 0.80 in developed areas. However, 
conventional sewers shall be designed for a minimum sewage flow of 100 lpcd or higher as the 
case may be.  
 
3.9 GROUND WATER INFILTRATION  
 
The inflow to sanitary sewers may also include flows due to infiltration of groundwater 
through joints.  As per CPHEEO manual, since sewers are designed for peak discharges, 
allowances for groundwater infiltration for the worst condition shall be made as per table 3.5 
and that d esign infiltration value shall be limited to a maximum of 10% of the design value of 
sewage flow.  
 
Table 3. 5: Ground Water Infiltration  
 
Item Unit  Minimum  Maximum  
Area  Litres/ha/day  5000  50,000  
Length  Litres/km/day  500 5,000  
Manhole  Litres/day/manhole  250 500 
Source: Table 3.3 of CPHEEO Sewerage Manual 2013  
 
The depth of subsoil water in the project area be mentioned. For design purposes, 
ground water infiltration through sewers may be adopted depending on depth of sewers to  be 
laid and d epth of sub soil water . 
 
3.10 PEAK FACTORS  
 
Flow in drains and sewers varies hourly and seasonally. However, for design purposes, 
peak factors may be adopted as per table 3. 6. Minimum flow may vary from 1/3 to ½ of average 
flow.  For population less than 10,000 , Babbit t’s formula1 with minimum and maximum limit  
of 3.0 and 6 .0 respectively may be used.  
 
Table 3.6: Peak Factors for contributory population  
 
                                                           
 
  
 Page 32 Contributory Population  Peak Factor  
Up to 20,000  3.00 
20,001 to  50,000  2.50 
50,001 to 750,000  2.25 
Above 750,001  2.00 
Source: Table 3.2 of CPHEEO Sewerage Manual 2013  
 
 Babbitt formula for peak factor = 5 P–02, where P is population  in thousand .  
 
3.11 DESIGN FLOWS  
 
 Sewage flows in design years (base, 10, 15 and 30 years), should be worked out by the 
following methods:   
 
▪ Computed flow based on rate of water supply and projected population (including 
floating) of the catchment, in design years. For calculating sewage flows, ground water 
drawn through private bores and ground water infiltration through sewers laid below 
ground water table should also be added.   
 
▪ Actual flows measured in drains and sewers in dry season projected for design period, 
taking into consideration the population for the respective design period. In hills, actual 
flow should be measured during yatra season als o. Copies of reports of flow 
measurements indicating the date / method of measurement should invariably be made 
a part of DPR. Data collected on actual sewage carried by drains, as discussed in 
Chapter 2 of these guide lines, shall be commented upon and ta bulated here.   
 
Higher values, worked out above, may be adopted as design flow unless justified for 
the specific city  having specific reasons and climatic condition . In some towns , the flow in the 
drains is many times higher than the computed flow based on the water supply indicating the 
contribution of ground water or some other source s like back water , canal or springs . In such 
situation , a ju dicious and well considered value should be taken for designing the 
interception/ diversion works, SPS and STPs . Efforts should be made to isolate the sewage from 
such other  source s. 
 
In towns , where water suppl ied is higher than recommended rate of water supply,  a 
programme for gradually decreasing the same to recommended rate of water supply shall be 
adopted , in view of the National policy of water conservation . 
 
A hydrograph for 24 to 72 hrs. exhibiting the peaks may be plotted against measured 
flows and area, to make an assessment of volume of accumulated flows. The assessment based 
on population projection may, quite often, neglect, some areas which are not accounted for or 
are outside municipal limits, but are actually contributing to flows in drains. The estimated 
quantity based on hydrograph may therefo re be used as reference figures for taking a judicious 
decision.  
 
Design flows adopted  in different years  shall be worked out and tabulated sewerage 
zone wise / drain wise so as to indicate the raw sewage flow to be diverted for treatment.  
 
However, in towns where present water supplied is less  than recommended rate and 
there is no possibility of increasing the same in near future , design sewage flows for STPs and  
 Page 33 E/M works of SPS may be based on current drain flows projected for the design period instead 
of on computed flows.  Their capacity be increased as and when  the rate of water supply and 
flow in the drains increases . However , suitable  provisions in the structure and space be 
provided  in the beginning .  
 
Design flows shall also include the flow reaching  STPs from drains flowing into the 
city from areas outside city boundary limits.  
 
As Per 2.4.9 (CPHEEO Manual) Geographical Information Systems (GIS) should be 
an integral part of sewage collection system. The spatial modelling  capabilities of GIS can be 
used to estimate current and future sewage flows, evaluate the capacity of the sewe rs and 
estimate the condition of the sewers.  
 
Design flows shall be adopted in different components as per table 3.7.  
 
Table 3. 7:Table: Design Flows to be adopted for different components  
 
S. No.  Component  Design capacity based on    
1 Interceptions  Projected peak drain flow  
in 30 years    
2 Sewers  Computed sewage generation  
in 30 years   @ 135/150 lpcd*  
3 Sewage pumping stations 
CW Computed sewage generation  
in 30 years   @ 135/150 lpcd*  
4 Sewage pumping stations 
EM works  Computed sewage generation  
in 15 years   @ 135/150 lpcd*  
5 STPs  Computed sewage generation  
in 15 years @ 135/150 lpcd*  
6 Effluent sewers  Computed sewage generation  
in 30 years   @ 135/150* lpcd*  
7 Land  For STPs / SPS on computed sewage 
generation  
in 30 years @ 135/150* lpcd*    
*Depending upon size of town  
 
3.12 INTERCEPTION  WORKS  
 
a. These shall comprise of cross overflow weir, gates, screens, interception channel, 
diversion drain, grit chamber, proportional flow weir  etc. 
b. These shall be provided near the outfall of the drains carrying untreated sewage into the 
river.  
c. These shall be provided taking into account the design peak flow, size of the drain and 
highest flood level (HFL) of the river.  These should not be designed using empirical 
rainfall -runoff formulae’s. Data should preferably be obtained from CWC/  other 
government agencies as defined in para 2.5 of this report. In absence of authentic data, 
proper observations need to be carried out.  
d. Some portion of the drain u/s and d/s of the  interception works shall be remodelled to 
suit the site requirement.   
 Page 34 e. During the rainy season , the sewage flowing into the drains will be supplemented by 
storm water. As this happens, the gates provided at the interception chamber shall be 
raised to allow  rain water to pass through and bypass the STP for which suitable 
arrangements shall be made.  
f. Suitable arrangements shall be provided for removal and disposal of solids, floating 
materials and silt to prevent silting of diversion sewers.  
g. There is a wide variation in the discharge in the Indian rivers during dry months and 
the rainy season. Because of this phenomenon, the flood plain of the rivers especially 
in Ga ngetic plains is very wide. The location of the interception works shall take due 
consideratio n of the flood plain of the river to provide unobstructed approach for O&M.  
h. Anti-corrosive measures like cathode protection and use of anti -corrosive materials 
shall be taken to prevent corrosion of the works.  
i. Hydraulic design shall be provided for every c omponent of I&D works  along with 
hydraulic flow diagram.  
j. I&D works to be so provided that they become integral part of the comprehensive 
sewerage plan of the town.    
 
3.13 DIVERSION / INTERCEPTING SEWERS  
 
(i) The sewers  proposed under the DPR should be so designed that they ultimately 
become a part of the town integrated and comprehensive system dealing with 
wastewater. The sizes and invert levels of sewers shall therefore, be provided 
accordingly and for the needs of ne xt 30 years.  
(ii) Minimum size of sewers shall be adopted as 200 mm for towns having present/base 
year population of over 1 lac and 150 mm in smaller towns. In hills, minimum diameter 
of 100 mm shall be adopted.  
(iii) Minimum velocity at initial/ultimate peak flow shall be adopted as 0.6/0.8 m/s and 
maximum velocity not to be more than 3 m/s. In hills, CI/DI pipes may be adopted  
along with suitable drop manhole arrangement to reduce the velocity greater than  3 
m/s. 
(iv) Maximum depth of flow shall be limited to 0.8 of th e diameter at ultimate peak flow 
for ventilation.  
(v) Life cycle cost analysis of different pipes shall be done and included in the DPR, if 
pipes other than RCC are proposed in gravity sewers.  
(vi) Condition assessment of existing sewers shall be carried out and the same shall be 
integrated into the proposed sewers. The report of such condition assessment should 
be invariably appended with DPR . Hydraulic design of sewers shall show integration 
of existing sewers with proposed ones.  
(vii) The alignment of proposed sewers shall take due consideration of HFL and flood plain 
of the river to provide safety of works and unobstructed approach for O&M. Measures 
taken in this regard, shall be stated.     
(viii) Trenchless technology method may be adopted at major road crossings, ra ilway tracks 
and other important junctions for laying of sewers. However, full justification for 
adopting trenchless technology instead of open excavation will need to be given along 
with plans showing such stretches.  
(ix) Sewers rehabilitation or laying of sew ers by trenchless method shall be proposed on 
technology neutral basis.  
(x) The plans should show basic details such as GLs, contours, land marks, major drains, 
their points of outfall, diameter and invert levels of existing and proposed major 
sewers, especially at junction points.    
 Page 35  
3.14 SEWAGE PUMPING STATIONS  
 
a. The civil works of sewage pumping stations proposed under this DPR would be 
provided for 30 years need and would ultimately become a part of the town’s integrated 
and comprehensive system of dealing with wastewater. The sizes of pumping stations 
and RLs of different components shall therefore, be provided accordingly. However , 
considering modular approach, pumping plants shall be provided to cater to next 15 
years and further pumps may be p rovided with a modular approach in a phased manner 
as the population grows.  
 
b. The configuration of sewage pumps may be adopted as per table 3. 8: 
 
Table 3. 8:Configuration of Sewage Pumps , based on length of rising mains  
 
Length of rising main  
 Pumps  No. of pumps  
Where rising main is long 
and where head losses are the 
dominant factor  Peak Flow/2 pumps  3 nos. (including 1 standby)  
 Non Peak  Flow pumps  2 nos. (including 1 standby)  
Where rising main is short 
and static head is dominant  Peak Flow/4 pumps  6 nos. (including 2 standby)  
Source: Table 5.1, Guide Lines for preparation of Project Reports under NRCP and NGRBA, 
Dec 2010  
 
c. Alternatively , pumps may be provided as given in table 3. 9.  
 
Table 3. 9: Configuration  of Sewage Pumps, based on size of sewage pumping station  
 
Size of Sewage Pumping Station  
 Pumps  No. of pumps  
Small capacity pumping station  1 pump of 1 DWF  
1 pump of 2 DWF  
1 pump of 3 DWF  
 3 nos.  
Large capacity pumping station  2 pump s of 1/2 DWF  
2 pumps of 1 DWF  
1 pump of 3 DWF  
 5 nos.  
Source: Para 4. 5.4 CPHEEO Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems Nov 2013  
 
d. The number of pumps may be  so chosen to provide a 100% standby capacity during 
peak hours, if the site conditions so warrant . For the purpose, required number of pumps  
may be kept in reserve in store for use in emergency.  
e. Design of pumping stations should take into consideration t he lean, average and peak 
flows. Pumping configuration should be appropriate for effective pumping of sewage 
in any of these flow conditions.  
f. Hydraulic retention time (Volume of wet well below invert of incoming sewer) shall be 
worked out as below, subjec t to minimum of 3.75 minutes of design peak flow:   
 Page 36 Volume of wet well V = T x Q / 4  
Where,  
 V: Effective volume of wet well (in cubic meters)  
 T: Time for one pump cycle (in minutes)  
 Q: Pumping rate (cubic meters per minute)  
 
The value of T is related to the number of starts per hour and it is not advisable to 
exceed 6 starts per hour. Accordingly, the value of T in the design is to be taken as 10 
minutes for smaller pumps but 15 minutes is desirable.  
 
Ideally this volume has to be provided below the invert of the lowest incoming sewer. 
However, it may not always be possible especially in large sized pumping stations. In 
such cases, volume in the sewers calculated at 0.8 times their total volume can be 
considered as the extende d wet well volume . (Source: Para 4.6.6 CPHEEO Sewerage 
Manual  (Nov 2013) . 
g. Size of sump of the pumping station shall be checked with the pump manufacturer(s) 
for adequacy and so mentioned in the DPR.  
h. Provision of control room shall be made in the DPR as per  specifications of the 
respective Discom.  
i. Submersible sewage pumps may be used, which are more economic in terms of both 
capital and operating cost besides being operation friendly.  
j. Recent version to submersible pumps are immersible pumps with a seal of o il around 
the motor which takes care of its cooling. Thus it is possible to pump out the wet well 
to almost the mid height of the pump and reduce the height of wet well below the 
incoming sewer, saving considerable construction cost. (Chapter 4 of CPHEEO 
Sewerage Manual  (Nov 2013 .) 
k. Condition assessment of existing pumping stations shall be carried out and the same 
shall be integrated into the proposed ones. The report of such assessment should be 
invariably appended with the DPR.  
l. To ensure constant running of pumping stations, diesel operated generating sets may be 
proposed at each pumping station. Provision should also be made for dedicated feeder 
line as well, as discussed in para 3.21 of these guide lines.  
m. HFL of the river shall be taken into consideratio n while deciding RLs of different 
components of the SPS  to provide safety and uninterrupted operation and maintenance 
of SPS . 
n. DG set capacity needs to be provided for peak flow requirement.  
o. To scale site plans of the proposed pumping stations should be provided, showing land 
available , layout plan of the proposed works and open space available for future 
requirement.  
p. Hours of power availability in the project area should be mentioned in the project.  
 
3.15 RISING MAINS  
 
In case of water supply works, economical size of the rising main is worked out by 
trying out various sizes and finding out net present value of the capital costs of pipe 
line/pumping machinery and capitalised electric energy costs. In case of rising mains  
carrying sewage it is not possible to calculate the economical size because of 
complexity of varying pumping rates etc. As such,  
  
 Page 37 a.  size of rising main  selected should be such that  to avoid silting, ensuring velocities 
not less than 0.8 m/sec (barest minimum ) and not exceeding 3 m/sec  at any time ( Para 
4.20 of  CPHEEO Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems Nov 2013 ). 
Suitable provision of rising main accessories, wherever needed, such as thrust blocks, 
anchor blocks, expansion joints, scour/dra in valves, air/vacuum release valves and 
surge protection devices shall be made in the DPR. Surge/water hammer analysis shall 
be calculated and made a part of the DPR.  
 
b. Rising mains must be designed for WHH (Water Hammer Head) also: It is important 
to sele ct the suitable class of the pipe based on clause no. 6.17.3(a), (b) and (c) of 
CPHEEO manual on water supply. Accordingly, if (a) Pumping Head (PH) + Water 
Hammer Head (WH) < 1.1  Allowable Pressure (AP)/Working Pressure (WP) of pipe, 
then the same class of pipe can be used, if (b) PH + WH > 1.1  AP/WP < 1.5 AP/WP, 
the same class of pipe can be used with provision of water hammer controlling devices 
and if (c) PH + WH > 1.5  AP/WP, then higher class pipe shall be proposed.  
 
 
3.16 SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS  
 
3.16.1  Raw Sewage Quality for STP Design  
 
3.16.1.1  Past experience indicates that normative values of parameters like BOD and SS have 
been taken for influent sewage despite actual quality characteristics having been 
established through field investigations. Such considerations result in over design of 
STPs with higher cost implications. This must be avoided and actual influent quality 
with an appropriate mark up only be considered for desig n purposes. For adopting 
BOD levels above 150 mg/l, proper justification must be provided. Copies of 
laboratory test reports of waste water incoming at existing SPS/STPs in the town or 
other towns in the vicinity, under similar situation, shall form part o f DPR.  The date 
and time of measurement of raw water quality shall invariably be mentioned in test 
reports.  
 
3.16.1.2  The raw sewage quality should be ascertained by composite sampling once a week for 
diurnal variation on hourly basis from the drain or nearby exist ing sewage outfall  
(SPS/STP) . Considering a 4 -week month, 3 samples are to be collected on weekdays 
and the fourth on an off day i.e. Sunday. Sampling for water quality should be 
conducted for at least one month during dry weather to assess pollution load 
quantitatively and qualitatively.  
 
3.16.1.3  The samples should be analysed for the parameters:  pH, temperature, colour, odour, 
alkalinity, TSS, VSS, BOD (Total & filtered), COD (Total & filtered), N (NH3, TKN, 
NO3), Phosphorus (Ortho -P, T -P), TC, FC, TDS, Cl, Sulp hates. For chances of 
industrial contamination - Heavy metals, Pesticides (Organo Chlorides, Organo 
Phosphates, Carbo nates), Detergents, other parameters as per type of industry. One or 
two samples may also be tested for emerging contaminants involving pre sence of 
pesticides, personal care products and antibiotics etc. as these are becoming important 
in future treatment processes. Such tests shall provide a good baseline data.  
  
 Page 38 3.16.1.4  In the absence of existing SPS / STP(s), actual measurements of raw sewage quality, 
from nearby town(s) having same rate of water supply and similar socioeconomic 
conditions , should be carried out  as stated above .  
 
3.16.1.5  Copies of raw sewage quality being monitored at the influent of existing STPs should 
also be collected for  the last 2 years  and shall be made a part of DPR . 
 
3.16.1.6  Summary of above laboratory water quality test reports should be provided along with 
their copies and shall be made a part of DPR.  
 
3.16.1.7  Raw sewage quality for design of STPs should be adopted accordingly. Ba sis of raw 
sewage quality adopted should be given  
 
3.16.2  Treated effluent Quality  
 
MoEFCC , vide Gazette notification , 843 dated 13th October,2017  under  Environment 
(Protection) Rules , has prescribed the  effluent discharge standard s for Sewage Treatment Plants 
(STPs) as given in table 3.1 0.  
 
Table 3. 10: Effluent Standards for Sewage treatment plants  
 
S. 
No. Industry  Parameters  Standards  
1 2 3 4 5 
Effluent discharge standards (applicable to all mode of disposal)  
105”  Sewage 
Treatment 
Plants (STPs)   Location  Concentration not 
to exceed  
(a) (b) 
pH Anywhere in the country  6.5 – 9.0 
Bio-Chemical 
Oxygen Demand 
(BOD)  Metro Cities*, all State Capitals 
except in the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Tripura Sikkim, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu 
and Kashmir, and Union territory 
of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, Dadar and Nagar Haveli 
Daman and Diu and 
Lakshadweep  20 
Areas/regions other than 
mentione d above  30 
 
Total Suspended 
Solids (TSS)  
 Metro Cities*, all State Capitals 
except in the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Tripura Sikkim, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu 
and Kashmir and Union territory 
of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands , Dadar and Nagar Haveli <50  
 Page 39 Daman and Diu and 
Lakshadweep  
Areas/regions other than 
mentioned above  <100  
Fecal Coliform (FC) 
(Most Probable 
Number per 100 
milliliter, 
MPN/100ml  Anywhere in the country  <1000  
*Metro Cities are Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad and Pune.  
Note :  
(i) All values in mg/l except for pH and Fecal Coliform.  
(ii) These standards shall be applicable for discharge into water bodies as well as for land 
disposal/applications.  
(iii) The standards for Fecal Coliform shall not apply in respect of use of treated effluent for 
industrial purposes.  
(iv) These Standards shall apply to all STPs to be commissioned on or after the 1 st June, 2019 
and the old/existing STPs shall achieve these standards within a period of five years from 
date of publication of this notification in the Official Gazette.  
(v) In case of discharge of treated effluent into sea, it shall be through proper marine outfall 
and the existing shore discharge shall be converted to marine outfalls, and in cases where 
the marine outfall provides a minimum initial dilution of 150 times at t he point of 
discharge and a minimum dilution of 1500 times at a point 100 meters away from 
discharge point, then, the existing norms shall apply as specified in the general discharge 
standards.  
(vi) Reuse/Recycling of treated effluent shall be encouraged and i n cases where part of the 
treated effluent is reused and recycled involving possibility of human contact, standards 
as specified above shall apply.  
(vii) Central Pollution Control Board/State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution Control 
Committees may issue more stringent norms taking account to local condition under 
section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986”.  
These standards should be followed. However, if is felt that more stringent norms are required, they 
may be adopted after giving justification  
 
3.16.3  Sewage Treatment Technology  
 
Sewage treatment plant s are based on the technology which may have the natural, 
chemical , powered  or non-powered  based processes.  The choice of technology option for 
sewage treatment is of great importance. In the NRCD MOEFCC document “Compendium of 
Treatment Technologies” published in 2009, (http://moef.nic.in/modules/recent -
initiatives/NGRBA/Final%20Compendium.pdf) technologies have been evaluated on basis of  
 
i. Performance,  
ii. Energy requirement,  
iii. Resource requirements and associated costs,  
iv. Land requirements.  
v. Annualized cost has also been worked out.   
 Page 40  
This compendium may be referred for selection of an appropriate sewage treatment 
technology. It implies that depending on the desired water quality of the effluent of the STP, 
land requirement, availability of electricity and funds available, the technology that appears 
feasible should be selected using the matrix given in Compendium of Technologies. Graph 
showing annualised cost (as in 2008) of treat ment and corresponding land requirement for 
various treatment technologies, as given in the above compendium, is placed as Fig 8. 
Constructed wetland technology may also be included in the sewage treatment plant technology  
options  as it offers one of the most promising methods  to treat sewage with low capital 
expenditure (CAPEX) and operation expenditure (OPEX) subject to the availability of land . 
This option may also be studied for improving the performance of  existing oxidation a nd 
stabilization ponds to the desired level.  
 
Fig. 8: Annualised cost (as in 2008) of treatment and corresponding land requirement for 
various treatment technologies  
(Source: Compendium of Treatment Technologies – MoEF 2009)  
 
Description of these technologies has been given in the Compendium, which may be 
referred  to. Since the publication of the Compendium, more technologies have been developed 
and used. Up -coming technologies like A2O process, MLE (modified ASP) may also be 
included as these address exclusively Nitrogen and Phosphorus, apart from conventional 
pollutan ts.   
 
Bioremediation  technique has also been developed involving the use of organisms to 
neutralize pollutants from a drain itself . .However, most of the work on Bioremediation has 
been done on laboratory scale or limited pilot instances. A State -of-the-Art report on 
‘Bioremediation, its Applications to Contaminated Sites in India’ has been published by the 
 
 Page 41 MoEF, Govt. of India ( http://www.moef.nic.in/downloads/public -
information/BioremediationBook.pdf ). This report gives a list of institutions having expertise 
in bioremediation. Appropriate institution may be consulted if bioremediation appears to be a 
feasible solution to the problem in the circumstances of a town.  
 
 The CPHEEO Manual  on Sewage Treatment Nov 2013 (para 5.8) makes the following 
observation:  
 
“It covers such of those technologies for which validated design guidelines are available 
in India over the past many decades. There are more recent technologies w ith each of them 
having their own design guidelines by the respective equipment vendors and for which 
obviously there are proprietary issues in procurement out of public funds. No doubt, unless 
these are tried out at some point in time, there is no way of inheriting these forever, but at the 
same time, the proprietary issue has to be got over. Hence, these technologies will be addressed 
later in this chapter under the title “Recent Technologies”. Accordingly, the technologies to be 
considered in this chapte r will be the Activated Sludge Processes, Attached Growth Systems, 
Treatment Methods Using Immobilization Carrier, Stabilization Ponds and Anaerobic 
Treatment. It is decided to phase out the stone media  trickling filter technology considering the 
difficult ies of upkeep of its rotary distributor, Psychoda  flies nuisance and the recent light 
weight media which give much more surface area for unit volume of the media as compared to 
the stone media.”  
 
NRCD has, in the year 2011, sanctioned 4 (four) demonstration/pilot project of “In -situ 
treatment of sewage through bio -remediation” at (i) Budha  Nala, Ludhiana, Punjab (ii) 
Bakarganj  Nala at Patna, Bihar (iii) Morigate  Nala, Allahabad, UP and City Drain, Farukabad, 
UP under NRCP/NGRBA with CPCB as the nodal agency for project implementation. The 
results of the project are not published yet. However, expected BOD from the pilot projects is 
limited to only 30 to 50 and TSS 80 to 130 only which are not in conformity to the new effluent 
parameters.  
 
Hence t hose technologies should be considered for selection in respect of which reliable 
information is available along with those mentioned in the compendium of Treatment 
Technologies  (2009)  and the Manual of CPHEEO  on Sewage Treatment Nov (2013) . 
 
3.16.4  Life Cycle Cost  Analysis  
 
The most cost effective and feasible option may be selected through their life cycle 
cost analysis of various technologies. The cost components that should be included are the 
following:  
 
a) Capital (One time cost)  
i. Land  
ii. Cost of various components of the system.  
 
b) Recurring (Annual)  
i. Energy (electricity & diesel)  
ii. Manpower cost in operation and maintenance  
iii. Consumables   
 Page 42 iv. Repair and maintenance  
v. Resource recovery (negative cost.)  
 
c) Water quality parameters – Influent quality, effl uent quality standards, effluent 
quality for reuse.  
 
This analysis should include capitalized costs, less revenue from resource recovery, 
recycling, by -product utilization etc. Ease of O & M, time required to construct and for 
achieving the desired object ives and costs of mitigation of any adverse environmental impacts 
must be considered on the costs assigned for the alternatives. Best option arrived from the LCC 
analysis should be selected and details should be presented in the DPR.  
 
Standard methodology  for calculating life cycle costs should be adopted.  
 
3.16.5  Provision for STPs on technology neutral basis  
 
Provision for STPs should be made on technology neutral basis. The technology 
provider may be asked to quote the rates based on the criteria such as raw sewage quality, 
effluent quality for reuse of effluent , availability of land  and O&M cost and ease i n 
maintenance of the STPs etc.  
 
Costs of STPs constructed elsewhere on latest effluent parameters should be given in 
support of estimated cost adopted in the DPR.  
 
3.16.6  Capacity / location of STP  
 
a. Present Capacity of STP shall be provided to cater to the needs of the next 15 years and 
construction may be done with a modular approach in a phased manner as the 
population grows. Condition assessment of existing STPs shall be carried out and the 
same shall be integrated into the proposed ones.  
b. The DPR is for intercepting the drains and treating the diverted wastewater. It is 
presumed that in the dry months the dra ins will carry mainly the wastewater from the 
town and there will be negligible storm water. Therefore, the entire flow in the drain 
should be diverted to the STP and treated. The STPs will, therefore, need to be designed 
based on the flow in the drains for the flow in the dry months  and the sewage generation 
based on the population,  whichever is higher . 
c. Proposed STP shall take due consideration of HFL (Highest Flood Level) of drain / nala 
/ river to provide safety and uninterrupted operation  and maintenance of the STP.  
 
3.16.7  Condition assessment of existing STPs  
 
Condition assessment and integration of existing STPs with the proposed one should 
invariably be carried out. Non Destructive tests on RCC structures should be done to provide 
confirmatio n of the stability and integrity of civil structures.  The report of such condition 
assessment should be appended with the DPR  
 
3.16.8  Resource Recovery  
 
Following methods of resource recovery are:   
 Page 43  
i. Sale of sludge as manure  or fuel  
ii. Sale of treated water for irrigation, horticulture  
iii. Fisheries etc.  
iv. Generation of electricity  
v. Carbon credit  
 
 All key parameters should be explained with detailed justification in the DPR.  
 
3.16.9  Sludge Management  
 
The DPR should have provision for a detailed Sludge Management Plan including the 
treatment, storage, handling facilities at site and approvals from ULBs to accept the solid waste 
generated by the STPs for its safe disposal / effective management.  
 
Chapter 6 of CPHEEO Sewerage Manual (2013) has laid down detailed Guiding P rinciples on 
sludge treatment and its uses. These need to be followed. Disposal of sludge shall have to be 
as per the hazardous waste (handling and management) rules of MoEF if ceiling concentration 
of heavy metals and faecal coliform limits are violated.  Every effort should be made to go eco -
friendly in dealing with biological sludge from STPs. They need to be dried to about 20% 
moisture and then integrated with the agriculture and farm forestry. If needed to be applied on 
sensitive lawn, Gamma ray radiat ion of the sludge is mandatory before such application. The 
advancement in anaerobic sludge digestion in the coming years may address these processes  
 
3.16.10    Septage / Faecal Sludge Management  
 
In areas where the sewerage network coverage is low, there has been reported 
tendencies of the septage being dumped at the receiving chambers or the drains to the STPs 
causing shock loads and leading to failure of the STP’s performance. Hence Septage / Faecal 
Sludge management practices are to be assessed and appropri ate provisions need to be built in 
while designing the STPs.  
 
3.16.11  Reuse of treated sewage  
 
Paragraph 2.12.1.7 of CPHEEO Manual recommends that reuse of treated water to a 
minimum extent of 20% shall be mandatorily explored. This should be kept in mind.  In vie w 
of higher treated effluent quality, concerted efforts will have to be made to explore and sell all 
the treated effluent to the potential buyers , 1st in industrial application, 2nd in domestic purpose 
and 3rd in agriculture sector . These may include laying new pipe lines for reusing the treated 
water by industries, domestic (toilet, cleaning) and horticulture.  For the purpose, t he end users 
will need to be identified, user agreement finalized and provision for recycled water network  
need to be established to ensure the recycling of treated sewage.  
 
  
3.16.12   Instrumentation and Data Acquisition  
 
 The process instruments of proven technology may be provided for efficient continuous 
online monitoring  at inlet and outlet of STPs , measurement of flows / water quality parameters  
 Page 44 and safety of operating staff and equipment as per prevailing norms. The instruments should 
show compliance to agencies such as ISO, BIS, EPA etc. as applicable.  
 
 The SCADA system should be capable of tak ing care of the complete Data Monitoring 
and Data Logging facility and should be based on l atest version of SCADA system.   
 
3.17 LAND REQUIREMENT  
 
Sewers are laid on the road side on publicly owned land. Hence no land is required to 
be acquired for sewers. However, land is required for sewage pumping stations and sewage 
treatment plants. In the above referred Compendium i.e., “Compendium of Treatment 
Technologies” published in 2009, ( http://moef.nic.in/modules/recent -
initiatives/NGRBA/Final%20Compendium.pdf )”, the land required per unit of wastewater 
treated in treatment plants has been given. It should be used to estimate the land required for 
STPs.  
 
3.17.1  Land for Sewage Pum ping Stations and STPs should be arranged to meet the 
requirement  for next 30 years .  
3.17.2  To scale site plan should be provided in the DPR showing t he layout  of proposed works , 
land require d for proposed works  and open space for future requirement.   
3.17.3  Status of  availability of land to be given on a statement showing land required for 
ultimate needs (of Interception works, SPS, STP, other works), land available, balance 
required, funds required for acquisition, provision made in DPR.  
3.17.4  Land for construction of vari ous structures / sewage pumping stations / STPs shall be 
in possession of executing agencies and land documents shall be attached to the DPRs.  
3.17.5  Photographs of the existing and the proposed land sites be attached with the DPR.  
 
3.18 FACTORS IN SEL ECTION OF SYSTEM OF WASTE WATER 
MANAGEMENT  
 
Sewerage Districts – Configuration of STPs.  
 
Depending on the availability of land especially for STPs, the locations of STPs may 
be determined. At one location where wastewater will be treated will receive wastewater from 
areas covered by one drain or more. This area will be the Sewerage area or Sew erage district 
of the STP.  
 
Factors which affect the selection of system are given below:  
 
i. Feasibility of utilising an existing interception & diversion system with necessary 
repairs, renovation, up gradation and modernisation.  
ii. Where new systems are to b e established, availability of land is a critical factor. In a 
district if suitable land of the required size is not available for installing STP, waste 
water must be carried to a place where land for the STP is available.  
iii. Availability of electricity. It i s crucial as a centralised system usually involves a long 
interception sewer necessitating laying of sewers at considerable depth and installation 
of intermediate pumping stations. These require power and since in most states there is 
shortage of power, st andby arrangements in the form of DG sets have to be provided 
for. Thus centralised system involves high capital cost and high O&M cost.   
 Page 45 iv. There are pros and cons of centralised and decentralised systems. They should be 
carefully analysed and compared. Life cycle costs of different systems should be 
compared.  
v. The ability and willingness of the people to meet their obligations to sustain the system 
etc.   
vi. Over the life cycle of the system, the net present value of annual costs and revenues 
should be worked out  of systems that are considered feasible and on that basis the 
system found to cost the least should be selected.  
 
Based on the above factors the most suitable system may be selected.  
 
3.19 PREPARING DRAWINGS  
 
Drawings of works proposed should be incorporated in the project report. The DPR 
should be prepared in the Geographical Information System (GIS) format if it is feasible . 
 
 Following drawings should be provided in DPRs:  
 
Sl.No.  Drawing Title  
 General Drawings  
1. Map of the Country and State Showing the Location of the Town  
2. Map Showing Ganga River Basin and Location of Town  
3. Base map of Town (Road, Railway track, Wards, Slum and important landmarks 
etc.) 
4: Satellite lmagery of Town  
5. Land use  Map/ Master Plan of Town (if any)  
6. Catchment Area  of the town.  
7. Map Showing overall drainage and their Outfall Point related to Town  
8. Map of Town showing locations of industries, CETPs and points of, untreated/ 
treated  effluent outfalls of industries, etc.  
9. Map Showing Contours for Town  
10. Map Showing Existing Sewer Network for Town  
 Proposed Drawings  
11. Key Plan of Proposed Scheme integrated with existing system along with Gls 
and ILs at critical  points,  drains,  their points of outfall, proposed SPS, STPs 
(Capacity in MLD)  
12. L-sections of sewers to show GLs/ ILs/ dia / length / type of sewers,  profile of 
ground and sewers.  
13. Plan and section for the outflow channel up to its merger with the river including 
outfall structure. All plans may invariably show the NSLs and HFL duly 
certifie d from the line deptts viz., CWC/State Irrigation/ Water Resources deptts.  
14. Location Map of Interception & Diversion of drain  
15. Map Showing Proposed Drains Interception and Diversion (I & D) Works  
16. Map Showing Proposed Fencing Stretches on various Drains (if considered)  
17. Location Map of SPSs/STPs as per actual site layout (showing lat/long, 
important landmarks and site surroundings).  
18. General Arrangement Drawing for Sewage Pumping Station   
 Page 46 Sl.No.  Drawing Title  
19. Layout Plan of Proposed/Existing STP with unit sizing, specific modification 
requirement (if any), Road, Guardroom, Staff quarter, Solar Panel, Plantation 
etc. 
20. Hydraulic Flow Diagram for Proposed/Existing STP.  
21. Plan and Profile of Treated Effluent Reuse Pipe Line  
22. Typical Details  of Manhole (Various Sizes)  
23. Typical House Connecting Chamber  
24. Typical Sewer Bedding Details  
25. Typical Boundary Wall  
26. Typical Single line Diagram for STP integrated with Solar Power (Electrical)  
27. Typical Single Line Diagram for SPS and MPS. (Electrical)  
28. Typical Process and Instrumentation Diagram integrating with SCADA system  
29. Typical cross -sectional drawing of drains (Existing & Proposed)  
30. Excavation plans and sections utilized for cost estimates towards excavation 
works.  
Note: All drawings shall be in appropriate scale to ensure the legibility and easy handling of 
drawings.  
a. A design memorandum providing the design calculations, assumptions and specifications 
adopted  to be provided in the report . 
b. Details of water hammer pressure in form of calculation sheet indicating that the 
pressurized pipe system pipe system viz. rising main is safe against water hammer needs 
to be provided.  
3.20 DEDICATED ELECTRICITY FEEDERS AND GENERATORS  
 
3.20.1  Sewage pumping and treatment need uninterrupted electricity supply. Therefore, 
average duration of supply of electricity should be ascertained so that the number of 
hours during which the Diesel generation (DG) sets will need to be operated can be 
known. D iesel generation sets will need to be provided to ensure constant running of 
the same. However, provision of dedicated electricity feeders for SPSs and STPs is also 
essential to meet programme objectives. DPR should contain details of such feeders 
like the  length of the cable from the source of power, specifications of transformers, 
and estimated cost. However, capacity is to be determined on the basis of requirement.  
 
3.20.2  Hrs. of availability of power at the sites of existing and proposed works in the project  
area should be given . 
 
3.21 OBJECTIVES, PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS AND RISK FACTORS  
 
The objectives and outcome of the project, in terms of abatement of pollution of the 
river and improvement of water quality and of environment improvement, should be clearly 
spelt. There should be performance parameters of the system as a whole and of each  component 
so that the effectiveness can be monitored and evaluated.  
 
3.22 PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS  
 
There should be performance parameters of each project component and the system as 
a whole so that the effectiveness can be monitored and evaluated. Sub -system a lternatives for  
 Page 47 major components such as sewage should include the alternatives of centralised systems and 
decentralised systems.  
 
Since the systems consisting of sewers involving pumping stations, and STPs are 
complex and are energy and capital intensive,  the guidelines may be followed for designing the 
components of the system.  
 
3.23 COST ESTIMATES  
 
Based on survey and investigation, data collection and design criteria, detailed 
estimates may be prepared, and abstract of cost may be presented as per Table 13.1.  
 
3.24 STRUCTURE OF DPRs  
 
Suggestive structure of DPRs is placed at Annexure IV.  
 
3.25 FLOW CHART OF ACTIVITIES FOR PREPARATION OF DPRS  
 
A flow Chart showing different broad activities for preparation of DPRs  is shown in 
Fig 9 . 
 Page 48 
Data 
CollectionSurveys Options Design
Status of Water
Supply (Present 
and Planned)Population 
(Present and 
Projected)
Topographical Hydrological Water Quality Existing STPs / SPS / 
Sewer network Environmental and Social 
Contour 
MappingElevation 
ModelGeotechnical Land 
Availability for 
SPS / STPsDrain and 
Outfall 
MeasurementDischarge 
(hourly and 
daily variation)Ground Water 
Level 
Variation Peak Surface 
Runoff
Drains Existing 
STPs 
Inlet/outletCondition 
Assessment
Present 
Status Attitudes Taxes / 
Changes Slum 
Areas Centralised Decentralised
Sewage 
District 
Formation Rate of w/s to 
be adoptedDifferent 
Options for 
Treatment Overall Layout
Hydraulic Flow Design 
Sewage Discharge
Design of Structural and 
E&M Works of STPFinancial 
BOQ Cost 
EstimationO&M Cost
Water ReuseResource 
Generation Overall 
Planning
Future 
Population 
Projection
Design Flows 
based on drain 
dischargeDesign 
Flows 
adoptedDesign Flows 
based on 
populationHydraulic Deisng of 
Interceptions, Diversion 
Sewer, SPS and Rising 
main 
 
Fig. 9: Flow chart of Activities for Preparation of DPR   
 Page 49 CHAPTER 4: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE  
 
4.1 CRITICALITY OF O&M  
 
Operation and maintenance of assets has emerged as a major concern in the success of 
this programme. NGRBA has now decided that funds for O&M for a period of 15 years 
initially, would be funded by the center.   The O & M responsibility beyond the 15th  year will 
rest with the State Government/ ULB.   
 
Tripartite MoA amongst MoEF, State Government and the local body is also to be 
signed. State governments are expected to take all necessary measures available at their control 
to address this problem in a s ustainable manner.  
 
 A centralized and computerized monitoring of performance of the system is also 
required to be established by state for all STPs to monitor the performance and take necessary 
remedial actions as required. Directions have been issued by  CPCB vide notification dated Mar 
02, 2015 for online monitoring of influent and effluents of highly polluting industries, CETPs 
etc. Copy of notification dated Mar 02, 2015 may be seen as Annexure V.  Accordingly,  devices 
may be installed on STPs dealing  with domestic waste also for their proper monitoring of the 
performance and taking timely remedial measures when necessary.  
 
It is necessary to accurately work out O&M cost. The records of O&M of assets created 
under GAP/NRCP may be examined carefully and  updated to the current levels as well as the 
periods when new facilities would be ready for operation. Cost of electricity is the major 
component of O&M accounting singly for 65 -70%. These as well as other components like 
manpower, consumables, etc. shoul d be calculated on a realistic basis to arrive at the total 
annual cost to operate an asset. Continuous availability of electricity for both STPs and PSs 
must be ensured on round the clock basis by the implementing agency.  
 
Preventive maintenance or repair s needed after a few year’s initial operations are often 
lost sight of. This is an important element of overall O&M cost and must be provided for 
appropriately.  
 
The DPR must clearly reflect the component -wise and total funds needed for O&M and 
how and wh erefrom these would be provided.  
 
The O&M should be optimized by adopting tools like SCADA etc. and as per CPHEEO 
Sewerage Manual.  Manpower required for maintenance need to be assessed considering 
optimization using SCADA and centralized automation.  
 
 
Given the provision of 15 years O&M expenditure in the project cost, outsourcing of 
O&M for this period would seem to be obvious. The contractor must  be asked to offer 
performance guarantees through proper O&M to achieve the outcomes. If O&M is outsourced,  
effort should also be made to build O&M capacity within the organization also.  The contractor 
must also provide operation manual with answers to FAQs, identification to sensitive locations, 
risk involved and preventive measures with Dos and Don’ts  properly listed  
 
As part of capacity building programme, operation and maintenance manuals have to 
be made available to the ULB’s staff by the DBO contractor.    
 Page 50  
 
4.2 RESOURCE RECOVERY AND REVENUE GENERATION  
 
With little additional and dedicated efforts, sewage treatment could be converted into a 
resource generation activity to partly meet the O&M costs. Treated sewage and sludge are both 
rich in nutrients and, therefore, can be suitably marketed as biological manure. With the 
increasing health consciousne ss, people prefer to eat food grown with such manure. It is, 
therefore, necessary to exploit this potential to the extent possible as a source of revenue 
generation.  
 
Biogas rich in methane is available from ASP based plants and much more from 
anaerobic tr eatment of sludge and also from anaerobic treatment process like UASB. It is 
necessary to fully exploit the potential of biogas through cogeneration of power.  A well -
designed treatment system may produce electricity from biogas to meet the entire in -house  
requirement. Anaerobic process like UASB, which is energy effective, may even produce extra 
power to supply to the grid after meeting the in -house requirement.  
 
Additionally, a cogeneration project can be converted into a CDM (Clean Development 
Mechanism -of Kyoto Protocol) activity, which would provide additional revenue through 
generation and sale of CER (Certified Emission Reduction) certificates. Given the global 
warming potential of methane as 21 times that of CO 2, a well -designed CDM project could 
help generate considerable revenue through the sale of CERs.   
 
Given the fact that electricity alone accounts for nearly 65% to 70% of the O&M cost, 
a cogeneration project with CDM benefits could help in offsetting the expenditure on this 
account to a large  extent. Therefore, STPs proposed on treatment processes like ASP, UASB 
etc. may include the cogeneration component depending upon economic viability. The project 
team must study well operating plants in the country in this regard. In this connection refer ence 
is invited to the Ministry of New and renewable Energy, GoI publication. “Guidebook – Power 
from Biogas as Sewerage treatment Plants” available on their website.  
 
It is necessary for the local bodies to enlarge the property tax base and utilize the 
additional revenue so generated to meet the O&M cost.   There could be several other 
innovative ways for local bodies to raise revenue towards O&M costs e.g. taxes from 
pilgrim/tourist/floating population visiting the city, u ndertaking plantation on municipa l lands 
and generating revenue there from etc.  The underlying need is to explore all avenues to raise 
matching resources for O&M to achieve sustainability.  
 
• Net O&M cost to be worked out after considering recovery of resources from treated 
sewage, bio gas , power generation, sewage sludge etc.  
• Present tariff, annual revenue / expenditure, revenue collection efficiency, sewer 
connection ratio be intimated.  
 
4.3 COST ESTIMATES FOR O&M  
 
The abstract of cost of annual O&M expenditure may be presented as per table 4.1. The 
estimates of costs of each component and the abstract shall form a part of DPR. If it is proposed 
to install the STP on a turnkey basis, the O&M may be made a part of the  work of turnkey  
 Page 51 contract of the STP. The O&M cost of each component shall be supported by its details. O&M 
cost shall be worked out for 15 years of commissioning of works  
 
 
 
Table 4. 1: Abstract of Annual O&M Cost  
         Rs. In Lakhs  
Components  Interception 
Works  Diversion / 
Interception 
sewers  SPS (s)  Rising 
Mains  STP(s)  Others  
(specify)  Total  
Manpower         
Power from grid and 
other sources as 
available         
Chemicals         
DG sets         
*Repairs and  
Maintenance         
On line Monitoring 
System         
Others (specify)         
Total Annual 
O&M Cost         
        
**O&M Cost 
during         
1st year         
2nd year         
        
        
        
15th year         
Total O&M cost 
for 15 years         
*Average annual maintenance cost  may be taken as  1% of the capital works . 
**Annual O&M cost beyond 1st year to be worked out by compounding present cost with 
general price index  / inflation which may be taken  as 5% on Manpower and 2% on Chemicals. 
However, no escalation may be considered on Power.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 Page 52 CHAPTER 5: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION & PUBLIC AWARENESS ANDSTAKE 
HOLDERS CONSULTATION  
 
5.1 INTRODUCTION  
 
The programme is for the preservation of natural resources and these are necessary for 
the benefit and welfare of public. The benefits of involving public in the decision making 
process are immense. It greatly helps in increasing public understanding of po llution abatement 
and subsequently defusing conflicts on government action by generating support of 
beneficiaries. The river cannot be conserved without the cooperation of the public and also they 
must have a sense of ownership with the programme. With a s mall investment public 
awareness, public ownership and public participation can be generated and many complex 
problems can be resolved.  
 
It is necessary to formulate an effective public education, awareness and 
participation  programme as part of DPR so as  to make them socially inclusive. The 
programme must take into consideration the following issues.  
 
An expert agency with right kind of background and experience may be engaged to 
formulate public participation strategy. Two types of outcomes are expected from this activity. 
The first one is public participation and through it agreement on complex issues like house 
connections, water conservation at household levels, proper collection of garbage so that it 
does not choke sewers/drains, sharing increased bur den of O&M cost, proper layout  of 
sewerage systems and location of STPs, diffusing conflicts, if any, on programme components 
etc. This can be best achieved through consultation at various stages of project formulation and 
implementation. The second one is  increasing public understanding about the programmes 
through awareness. This should be achieved through workshops, seminars, street plays, city 
runs and riverside walks. Active involvement of students and teacher’s  community in schools 
and colleges can gr eatly help in achieving the objectives. Public can also play the role of a 
watchdog in supervising project implementation and operation and maintenance which would 
help improve the quality of the programme.  
 
Emphasis may be placed on increasing public par ticipation for the projects/schemes 
supported by NMCG or Namami  Gange. Apart from hiring expert agencies for this purpose, 
arrangements to involve active non -governmental organisations should also be made.  
 
In the above background, a comprehensive programme giving details of the activities with 
timetable and cost involved should be prepared and presented in the DPR. This should be taken 
as a continuous activity right from the beginning of the programme and mu st continue in post 
commissioning stages also.  
 
5.2 OBJECTIVE  
 
 The objective of public education, awareness and participation programme  should be 
to ensure that  
i. The communities are aware that - 
a. There is a need for the programme to intercept the drains that carry the wastewater of 
the town into Ganga and treat it before it is finally discharged and that they will derive 
multiple benefits from it. The benefits need to be specified.   
 Page 53 b. Though there will be recoveries in the form of compost and nutrient rich water and 
electricity, still there would be additional costs  in  O&M and these costs may have 
to be borne by them,  
ii. The communities are effectively involved in all stages of the project cycle from 
conceptualisation, to preparation, to finalisation, to implementa tion and finally O & M. 
Such involvement will generate a sense of ownership of the programme among the 
stakeholders.  
iii. To keep the stakeholders and citizens informed of the progress of the project at all stages, 
a website with updated information about impor tant features of the project may be created 
and arrangement made to send replies to project related queries . 
 
5.3 PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AS FRONT 
ENDACTIVITY   
 
 Public Awareness & Public Participation should be a front -end activity of the project. 
The entire programme of conservation should be conceived, formulated, implemented, 
monitored and evaluated in close consultation with the stake holding communities following 
the approach of ‘Participatory Appraisal’.  
  
 The agency that will plan, implement and coordinate the awareness campaign should 
be identified. With a view to focus on issues relating to protection and improvement and 
cleaning of rivers, a massive program of environment education and awareness is imper ative. 
Centre and states may launch this campaign through a program of volunteers called GREEN 
VOLUNTEERS.  
 
5.4 TARGET GROUPS  
 
i. Local influential/Community leaders,  
ii. Local NGOs,  
iii. School teachers and students,  
iv. Elite groups and organisations like Rotary Club, Lions  club, Associations and forums 
of writers and artists, doctors, lawyers and other professional bodies etc.,  
v. Religious leaders and priests,  
vi. Representatives of industry and commerce,  
vii. Leaders of trade unions and organisations like safai  karamchari  sanghs,  
viii. Leaders of teachers and students associations,  
ix. Representatives of political parties including the elected office bearers and members of 
  local bodies,  
x. Members of legislative assemblies, legislative councils and parliament representative 
of local constituenci es, 
xi. Representatives of media viz. editors/correspondents of local press and key 
functionaries of local radio and TV stations,  
xii. Grass  root level functionaries of Municipalities and state government departments like 
public health, forestry, Jal Nigam, PWD, et c., 
 
5.5 ACTION POINTS FOR COMMUNITY AWARENESS  
 
i. Action be taken to get the Urban Local Body (ULB) to discuss the issue of river 
pollution – causes and effect and the need to take conservation measures.   
ii. Request the ULB to set up a Committee on Awareness Generation and Public 
Participation for the entire city. Members of the Lok Sabha and the Vidhan Sabha may 
be co-opted  as special invitees. In turn, the Committee should invite civil society  
 Page 54 organisations in the city that are active to participate in the Awareness Generation and 
Public Participation Programme.  
iii. With the involvement and help of the ULB, or otherwise, for each ward identify an 
active NGO or promote a group of interested and comm itted people to be involved in 
Ganga Pollution Abatement Project.   
iv. The agency preparing the Pollution Abatement Project should prepare a plan of 
awareness generation and public participation and submit it to the Committee on 
Awareness Generation and Publi c Participation for approval. The plan could consider 
including the following activities, among others: - 
 
a) Print and electronic media including the local news papers should be invited and 
supported in covering the issue of pollution of rivers.  
b) A website ma y be created to provide facts about the state of sanitation, in 
particular, the degradation of the river. It should be regularly updated.  
c) Holding locality wise meetings and group discussions with influential people, 
whereby the extent of river pollution, t he related physical and human factors, the 
consequent health hazards and the possible remedial measures are highlighted 
through talks and technical presentations by the experts and social workers 
(Action: Identified NGO of reputation).  
d) Motivating influenti al group to play a leading role in promoting environmental 
sanitation and community health, particularly prevention of river pollution 
(Action: Identified NGO of reputation).  
e) Motivating and advising local NGOs to participate in outlining execution and 
follow up efforts of community action plans for ensuring a clean and healthy 
community life in general and protection of river water quality in particular 
(Action: Identified NGO of reputation).  
f)  Promoting schools as models of clean living and healthy environm ents and 
training school teachers and students as motivators and informal change agents 
for involving families and communities in clean river programmes in general and 
maintenance of toilets/bathing ghats/crematoria in particular (Action: Identified 
NGO wi th excellent track record of having rendered specialised services in the 
area).  
g) Motivating school management, administrative and teaching faculty to organize 
events and special programmes for checking river pollution and plantation of trees 
on river banks (Action: Identified NGO and functionaries of the Department of 
Forestry).  
h) Motivate the local influential trade, business, professional, social service, 
religious associations/chambers/Clubs and individuals to  participate in awareness 
generation programme.  
i) Inform, educate and invite potential investors to associate themselves in activities 
such as solid and liquid waste management services through an effective strategy 
of public -private partnership. They can also sponsor plantations on river banks 
and adopti ng a certain planted area for protection and preservation.  
j)  Inform, educate, organise and motivate religious leaders and priests to participate 
actively in river pollution control through such efforts as educating the masses, 
checking the dumping of temple  waste on the river bank and  immersing half burnt 
or unburnt dead bodies into the river (Action: NGO of reputation).  
k)  Motivate the office bearers of trade unions and other professional organisations 
like teachers and students associated to win public supp ort for their cause by 
rendering some fruitful service to the society. While doing so they may give  
 Page 55 highest priority to community health promotional measures like river pollution 
control and conservation of the quality of river water (Action: NGO of 
reputa tion).  
l) Motivate local MLAs and MPs and leaders of political parties to participate 
actively in the promotional efforts of community involvement for protecting river 
against the hazards of pollution -an effort, which shall pay them abundantly 
through the bui lding of positive public opinions. They should also be motivated 
to form local level all party organisations/ forums to promote the measures of 
river pollution control. In addition, they should be motivated to take keen interest 
in the proper utilisation o f the funds provided for river pollution. In addition, they 
should be persuaded to play effective liaison between the government and the 
people to ensure the timely completion of different programmes and activities 
undertaken by the Directorate of National  River Conservation Programme 
(Action: NGO having a sound background of linkages with the legislative and 
political leaders).  
m)  Motivate leading persons representing local press and electronic media.  They 
need to be encouraged to be conscious of their socia l commitment and social 
obligations. They should also be convinced that socially conscious media shall 
always be aptly recognised and enormously rewarded through the creation of a 
sound base of enlightened clientele group which in the long run will help th em 
through the image building process. Accordingly, the editors and correspondents 
of local press, the officers and key functionaries of the programme  of river 
pollution control measures through the active involvement of the people need to 
be associated wi th creation of public awareness and participation. (Action: NGOs 
of repute having a sound organisation infrastructure of public relations unit).  
n)  Awaken, educate and encourage the grassroot level functionaries belonging to  
Urban local bodies,  offices and agencies dealing with  public health, sewerage, 
forestry, water supply, public works, electricity, industry, tourism etc. to take 
special interest in the activities which are directly related to the aspect of river 
pollution control. They should be particu larly motivated to be more conscious of 
their commitment and obligation to ensure the purity of river water so that the 
future of the present and coming generations of the society and so also the 
members of their own community is safe -guarded against healt h hazards. (Action: 
NGO having the background of specialised contribution to the area concerned).  
o) Organise campaigns to encourage the use of community toilets and discourage 
open defecation, especially on open land near river banks.  
p) In areas where there ar e sewers, encourage people to connect their houses to the 
sewer.  
q) Organise, for different sections, events such as essay, debates, posters, slogan, 
painting, script etc.  
r) Send information sought by the stake holders about the project during different 
phases beginning with preparation of the project to its implementation, 
commissioning, operation and management.  
  
5.6 IMPORTANT STAGES OF STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION 
AWARENESS GENERATION AND SECURING PUBLIC PARTICIPATION  
 
i. Preparation of DPR  
ii. Submission of the project to  the State Government  
iii. Stage of sanction by the NRCD  
iv. During implementation   
 Page 56 v. Any stage when obstacle if faced, say in identification of land needed for works.  
vi. Implementation of DPR  
vii. Commissioning and evaluation  
 
5.7 COST ESTIMATE  
 
 A provision of 2% -3% of the project cost may be made for generation of public 
awareness and securing public participation. Various items of cost for which provision should 
be made are illustrated in the table 5.1.  
 
Table 5. 1: Cost Estimate for Public Awareness and Public Participation  
 
S. 
No. Item  Basis of Calculation  
(Amount in Lakhs  of 
Rs.) Total 
Amount  
Rs. In Lakhs  
A Mass Media  
1 (a) Television (films and promotional for TV 
Advertisement) (Professional grade digital 
recording)    
   (b) Advertisement of local Cable Network    
2 (a) Radio talks (preparation and subject expert 
charges)    
   (b) Advertisement in Local F.M.    
3 Print Media publicity in local papers, magazines 
etc.  Advertisement in the tourist guide books etc., 
Special features and commissioned articles    
4 Print material for Distribution  including publicity 
on match boxes, stationary, stickers, etc.    
5 Hoarding at strategic points in the city and on 
buses, rickshaws etc.    
6 Website Development with hosting and updation 
for three years    
B. Events   
7 Sponsoring / Organising Events like Puja, Local 
Festivals etc.    
8 Preparation of Exhibition Material, Posters and 
Organising these events - river  festival and run for 
the river events    
9  Special Cultural Events, Performances of Folk 
Media: (Folk theatre, Folk Music, Folk Stories)  
Street Plays (performances  specially for slum 
localities)    
C. Groups and Meetings    
10 Environmental Awareness at Schools Level 
(Talks, Essay, painting competitions, debates, 
other activities 5 per ward per year for 3 years    
11 Formation of Action Groups, Self help groups and 
support to social groups/clubs for awareness 
generation activities    
12 Other Awareness activities like public meetings, 
public debates, Meetings with different Unions, 
felicitation of best workers etc.     
 Total for Public Awareness and Public Participation Activities    
 Page 57 S. 
No. Item  Basis of Calculation  
(Amount in Lakhs  of 
Rs.) Total 
Amount  
Rs. In Lakhs  
 Grand Total   
 
  
 Page 58 CHAPTER 6: TRAINING, HRD AND CAPACITY BUILDING  
 
6.1 PHASES OF POLLUTION ABATEMENT PROJECT  
 
A project passes through the following phases:      
 
1. Project preparation  
2. Project implementation,  
3. Operation and maintenance  
4. Monitoring and evaluation  
5. Management of the completed project  
  
6.2 DOMAINS OF KNOWLEDGE INVOLVED  
 
1. Scientific and technical – water quality, aquatic biology, civil engineering, 
electrical engineering, mechanical engine ering, remote sensing and GIS  
2. Social sciences – stakeholders analysis; social survey,  
3. Communication science: awareness generation and public participation  
4. Financial & economic: financial evaluation of projects, raising of financial 
resources  
5. Institutional:  institutional effectiveness in performing its functions  
6. Administrative: administrative aspects  
7. Legal and regulatory: developing suitable laws and regulations for effective 
functioning of the ULB  
  
6.3 HUMAN   RESOURCE   REQUIRED      
 
 Successful project preparation, implementation and management need the manpower 
with diverse expertise in the above domains of knowledge with relevant experience in similar 
works. Skill acquisition is achieved through education, training and experience.  
 
6.4 EDUCATION NEEDS      
 
 The table 6.1 the required educational attainments of manpower.  
 
Table 6. 1: Educational Requirement of Staff Required for Pollution Abatement projects  
 
Stage of Project  Requirement of Manpower  
Highly educated  
Master’s Degree  Degree 
Level  Diploma 
Level  Certificate 
Level  
Problem Identification  √ √   
Conceptualization  √ √   
Project Planning  √ √   
Project Preparation  √ √ √  
Project Implementation   √ √ √ 
O&M   √ √ √ 
Monitoring , creating data 
base and its analysis for 
corrective action   √ √ √   
 Page 59 Stage of Project  Requirement of Manpower  
Highly educated  
Master’s Degree  Degree 
Level  Diploma 
Level  Certificate 
Level  
Evaluation  √ √   
Management - regulatory  √ √   
6.5 TRAINING NEEDS  
 
 Training needs of skilled manpower are met through short term training programmes of 
duration of a few days, weeks and months. But training can be imparted only if the trainee has 
the necessary educational attainment. Regarding a project  that is under execution, after it has 
been commissioned, it is necessary that staff with proper training and experience is in place for 
O&M of assets. The responsibility of operation and maintenance of STPs and main pumping 
stations should rest with the contractor  who supplied the plant, for 10years after commissioning 
of the project. It should be ensured that the contractors/suppliers of equipments deploy properly 
trained and experienced staff for this work. Even if contractors and suppliers are bound by the 
contr act to operate and maintain the equipment they supplied or erected, they should be required 
to  
 
i. Impart training to the identified personnel of the agency that owns the project and has 
the responsibility for its proper functioning.  
ii. Provide operating manuals of the equipment installed.   
 
6.6 EXPERIENCE NEEDS  
 
These needs are met by the personnel working on real assignments. Those in charge of 
personnel management need to ensure that the needed experience is available to them within 
the o rganization.  
 
6.7 FULFILLING MANPOWER NEEDS –MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT 
PLAN  
 
 The State Government, in the light of the state of degradation of their water resources, 
in particular of their rivers, should prepare a plan of capacity building and manpower 
developmen t, in addition to their normal plan for capacity building, for deployment in the 118 
towns where the I&D and STP projects are to be taken up.  
 
 An assessment of the personnel needed for various functions, their training needs and 
availability of persons who can be trained should be prepared.  Academic disciplines in which 
personnel with postgraduate degree, undergraduate degree, diploma and certificate are needed 
and the numbers in each need to be identified. The personnel that would, after education and 
training constitute, a pool of human resource that is equipped to handle the items of work, 
mentioned in these guidelines including O&M should be identified . They should be sent to 
undergo suitable educational programmes and training programmes.  . The O& M personnel  are 
mandated to acquire the certification of Waste water treatment plant technicians and Helpers 
by Skill Council for Green Jobs (SKGJ), M/o Skill Development & Entrepreneurship, GOI.  
Two National Occupational Standards SGJ/Q6601 and SGJ/Q6602 ha ve been developed by 
SCGJ for waste water treatment plant technicians and helpers respectively.  
 
 A list of institutions of higher education with the academic disciplines where the 
personnel can be sent for education should be prepared.   
 Page 60  
 Training need identification is a continuous process and in the identified subject areas 
training institutions can be requested to develop training programmes.  
 
 It is the responsibility of those in charge of human resource development in the States 
– in the government and local bodies – to ensure that they have the necessary manpower 
resources with needed educational attainments, training and experience for undertaking the 
work arising out of the programme of pollution abatement of rivers.  
 
 Standing arrangement with in stitutions engaged in education and training can help the 
States to ensure that they are not short of the needed manpower.  
 
 In case of shortage of manpower in specific disciplines, suitable persons can be 
obtained on loan or on contract or the work can be  assigned to an agency that has the capability 
to deliver.  
 
6.8 CAPACITY BUILDING  
 
Capacity is a function of two aspects, namely human resource and physical and 
financial resources. Human resource has been dealt with above. Physical resources imply 
equipping the staff deployed for this work with necessary financial resources and physical  
resources such as space, laboratory, tools etc.  The DPR should incorporate the requirement of 
these resources for proper operation and maintenance and management of the project.  
 
 
6.9 COST ESTIMATES  
 
 Various activities involved in HRD and capacity building are mentioned in the table 
6.2.  
 
Table 6. 2: Cost Estimate of HRD and capacity building  
 
S. No.  Items  Cost (Rs. 
Lakhs ) 
1. Project Implementation Secretariat   
1.1 Office building, equipment and infrastructure for project 
Implementation Secretariat and design cell   
1.2 Hiring of professional for design, management, technology, 
monitoring   
1.3 Establishment expenses during the project implementation, audits, 
inspection inc luding Staff salary   
2 Motivational Training, study tour and Skill development for 
supervisors, safaikaramchari, sanitary inspectors, officers, design cell 
etc  
3 Monitoring Stations at different locations of air and water quality in 
the city, STPs, rivers, bathing ponds   
4 EIA assessment of works and evaluation after commissioning of the 
project   
 Total    
 Page 61   
 Page 62 CHAPTER 7: PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM  
 
 
The State Nodal Department and the state PMG must explore the possibility of 
promoting joint ventures in Public Private Partnership (PPP) , departmental implementation of 
projects, existing state/central governmental undertakings  or setting up a special purpose 
vehicle to implement these projects.   
 
The State Government may employ a number of project executing agencies for different 
types of projects. For the preparation of DPR reputed professional consultants may be engaged 
by the State Government.  
  
 Page 63 CHAPTER 8: PROJECT MANAGEMENT & INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES  
 
 The institutional arrangement for the i mplementation of this programme  at the Central 
and State levels is visualized as below.  
 
8.1 NATIONAL MISSION FOR CLEAN GANGA (NMCG)  
 
 It has been established as a registered society that is responsible for effective 
implementation of the overall NGRBA program at the national level with well -defined 
functions, powers, resources and autonomy. It has (i) formal devolution of powers to ensure 
appropriate level of operational autonomy; (ii) single -point responsibility for planning and 
execution of the NGRBA program; (iii) powers to manage its human resources, with the 
objective of attracting and retaining well -qualified staff; and (iv) institutional sustainability as 
the permanent entity responsible for the conservation and health of the river Ganga in the lo ng 
term. The Program Management Group (PMG) is headed by the Director  General .  
 
8.1.1 State Program Management Group (SPMG)  
  
 Each state has a State (SGRCA) Program Management Group (SPMG) as a registered 
society, to ensure effective implementation at state le vel with the exception of Jharkhand, 
which has a dedicated cell within the UD Department, as a very small stretch of the Ganga 
main stem passes through the state.  
 
 The SPMGs are the respective state level counterparts of the PMG and have state level 
responsibilities for management and implementation of the NGRBA Program in accordance 
with the agreed NGRBA program framework. They are also responsible for capacity buil ding 
of Executing Agencies (EAs); managing state level IEC campaigns, stakeholder consultations 
and community participation; and other state level activities in the Institutional Development 
Component (Component One) of the project;         
 
 The SPMG is h eaded by a Project Director and includes specialists in basin planning, 
wastewater engineering and management, ecology, environment and social management, 
finance & economics , operations, procurement, knowledge management, IT, communications, 
human resourc es management, and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
8.1.2 Executing Agencies  
  
 Execution of the infrastructure investments is done by the Executing Agencies (EAs), 
selected for each investment. The choice of EAs includes the existing state -level technical 
agencies,  which have the mandate of urban infrastructure (especially wastewater) management 
in their respective states.   
 
8.1.3 Program Management Consultancy  
  
 This consultant is to provide program management support to PMG, including 
planning, technical support for investments review and appraisals, portfolio management, 
procurement, financial, management, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting  
 
8.1.4 Technical Sup port Consultancy  
   
 Page 64  This consultant is to provide technical support to SPMGs and EAs, for upgrading the 
process and practice of preparation of schemes of investments and their execution to global 
standards.  
  
8.1.5 Other Partner Agencies  
 
 The PMG and SPMGs are  to collaborate with and seek support from and partnership 
with a range of other agencies, to draw upon their specialized expertise and supplement the 
capacity of main implementing agencies. These will include international, national and local 
knowledge in stitutions, private sector business houses and industries, and civil society groups.  
 
8.1.6 Tiered Implementation Structure  
 
 Thus the programme implementation at various levels is envisaged as follows: (a) 
National Level: PMG, (b) State level: SPMG, and (c) Ac tivity level: Executing Agencies (EAs) 
selected for specific activities with local coordination for planning and implementation 
provided by Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) where needed.  
 
8.1.7 Programme Framework  
 
NGRBA has prepared a Programme Framework containing provisions in detail that will 
govern this programme. These include  
 
• Implementation Arrangement  
• Detailed Investment Framework  
• Financial Management Manual  
• Environmental and Social Management Framework  
• Com munications and Public Outreach Framework  
• Governance and Accountability Action Plan  
• Memorandum of Agreement – Programme  
• Memorandum of Agreement – Investment  
• Procurement Manual  
 
8.1.8 Preparation of DPR Component Scheme Wise and Integrated Summary  
 
Works are sanctioned only on the basis of a DPR. Each component scheme will have a 
DPR. Therefore, a pollution abatement project in respect of a city may have as many DPRs as 
the number of component schemes so that it is convenient to submit it to the funding agency . 
However, there should be a consolidated summary of all DPRs that gives an overall view of 
the project, its components and costs.  
 
DPR is very crucial and forms the foundation for the success of efforts to improve the 
water quality of rivers and to achiev e the objectives of the NRCP. Every care should be taken 
to ensure that it is of high quality and, therefore, preparation of DPR deserves to be treated as 
a project in itself. A suggestive structure of DPR is given in Annexure IV. 
 
8.1.9 Appointment of Team to Prepare DPR Departmentally  
 
Every agency that is assigned a component scheme should appoint a team of competent 
staff to undertake different activities that are required to be performed at different stages of the  
 Page 65 scheme. The project reports can either be p repared departmentally if there is in -house capacity 
or through a competent consultant.  
 
 
 
8.1.10  Appointment of Consultants to Prepare DPR  
 
If it is felt that circumstances are such that it will be difficult to departmentally 
undertake all the activities involved in the preparation of the DPR, an outside agency can be 
appointed to undertake identified activities or prepare the entire DPR.  However, care has to be 
exercised in selecting the agency. For selecting the agency Expression of Interest (EOI) may 
be invited from agencies and then selecting agencies that have the manpower, financial and 
physical resources to prepare the DPR. Papers for submitting the EOI have to be prepared 
carefully so that it can be ensured that all the information needed to evalua te the capacity, 
competence and suitability of the agencies is provided by the interested parties. Technical and 
financial offers may then be invited from the selected parties.  
 
8.1.11  ULB participation  
 
The participation of the concerned Urban Local Body (Municipality / Municipal 
Corporation) in the project should be ensured by getting their concurrence to the DPR and 
including MOM of the meetings with the ULB in the DPR. They should be encouraged to build 
technical capacity to undertake O&M the assets and to manage the system.  
 
8.1.12  Responsibility for activities and schemes  
 
 Table 8.1 suggests the agencies that can be given responsibility for schemes  
 
Table 8. 1: Planning and Implement ing Agencies  
 
Type of Schemes  Item of work  Planning and Implementing Agency  
 Study of River and its 
basin  State Project management Group 
(SPMG) or Pollution Abatement Cell 
(Jharkhand)  
 Selection of cities  SPMG with the approval of Central 
PMG  
Sewerage 
Schemes  Sewerage Works & STPs  Institutions like Jal Nigam, Sewage 
Boards, PHEDs  etc where they exist. In 
other places, the State Level Agency 
will decide who should do the work.  
Non Sewerage 
Schemes  Solid Waste  ULB  
 CSS / CTC  ULB  
 Crematoria  ULB  
 Carcass disposal  ULB  
 Cattle Wallowing  ULB  
 Dairies  ULB  
 Dhobi ghats  ULB  
 Motor Garages  ULB   
 Page 66 Type of Schemes  Item of work  Planning and Implementing Agency  
 River Front Development  Water Resources / Irrigation 
Department  
Plantation  Plantation  Respective Implementing Agencies in 
whose schemes plantation is to be  done  
 
8.2 MONITORING, SUPERVISION, GUIDANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
 
Whether the DPR is prepared departmentally or by a Consultant, it is necessary for the 
implementing agency to arrange regular monitoring, supervision of activities involved in 
preparation of the DPR and provide guidance from time to time and exercise quali ty control. 
This should be done by the State PMG’s own staff or, if there is shortage of suitable expertise, 
help of suitable consultants can be taken.  
 
8.3 IMPLEMENTATION OF DPR – EXECUTION OF WORKS PROPOSED IN 
THE DPR  
 
8.3.1 Mode of Implementation:   
 
For implemen ting the works in the DPR, there are a number of options available as 
described below:  
i. Departmental supervision,  
ii. Project management agency  
iii. Combination of above  
 
8.4 INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES IN MANAGEMENT  
 
8.4.1 Activities  
  
In conservation and management there are a number of institutions dealing with 
activities including:  
i. Policy, strategy and programme formulation and their implementation  
ii. Supply of services  
iii. Development,  
iv. Management,  
v. Regulation and enforcement,  
vi. Coordination with national, state and local organizations.  
 
8.4.2 Overlap in roles of institutions:  
 
 The role of three bodies is very crucial. These are:  
 
i. Municipality which is responsible for sanitation in the city,  
ii. City Development Authority which regulates the new colonies.  
iii. State Pollution Control Board, which is responsible for ensuring compliance by 
industry and other institutions of the standards, prescribed under the Environmental 
Protection Act for effluent, solid waste and air emissions.  
iv. State Agencies - performing functions of municipal bodies relating to wa ter and waste 
water.  
v. District administration.  
   
 Page 67 Many times there is an overlap in roles of several bodies with the result that the 
efficiency with which the function should be performed suffers. The State PMG should identify 
such areas of overlap and move the state Government to resolve such overlaps. The role of 
each institution involved needs to be very clearly specified.  
 
 In the chapter on collection of secondary data it has been mentioned which  data should  
be collected so that the strengths  and weaknesses of the ULB and other institutions working in 
the city are reflected. This needs to be analysed to identify the areas where remedial measures 
are needed.  
 
 The SPMG should solve any issues that may arise.  
 
8.5 COST ESTIMATE OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT  AND INSTITUTIONAL 
ARRANGEMENTS  
 
The SPM G, which is the state implementing agency, may need financial support. 
Illustrative items for which funds may be required are mentioned in table 8.2 and table 8.3.  
 
Table 8. 2: Cost Estimate  of Project Management and Institutional arrangements - State 
Level Implementing Agency  
 
S. 
No. Items  Cost (Rs. in 
Lakhs ) 
1.1 Infrastructure and equipment such as computers, CAD   
1.2 Hiring of professional   
1.3 Establishment expenses   
1.4 Project related expenses   
1.5 Miscellaneous items   
 Total   
 
Table 8. 3: Cost Estimate of Project Management and Institutional Arrangements 
District/City Level Unit  
 
S. 
No. Items  Cost (Rs. in 
Lakhs ) 
2.1 Infrastructure and equipment such as computers, CAD   
2.2 Hiring of services   
2.3 Establishment expenses   
2.4 Data collection   
2.5 Survey & investigation   
2.6 Miscellaneous items   
 Total   
 
Project preparation and implementation cell for specific projects agency wise  
 
An estimate of expenses required for each component on the above lines should be 
prepared.  
   
 Page 68 CHAPTER 9: PERFORMANCE MONITORING  
 
9.1 The programme aims at improving the water quality of river and sanitary conditions in 
the city. Benchmarks of water quality are already available for the designated best use. 
The success of the programme would be established if the benchmark water quality is 
achieved.  
 
9.2 THIRD PARTY INSPECTION SYSTE M 
 
 A monitoring mechanism is to be put in place to monitor the performance of STPs and 
pumping stations and their impact on water quality of the river. A Third Party Inspection (TPI) 
system should be established for the project in each town. It will revie w and monitor the 
performance of the project through the entire life cycle of implementation on the basis of 
detailed onsite review, examination of appropriate documents and discussions with the EAs 
and other key stakeholders.  
Engineering educational insti tutions available in the city or in the State or office of the 
State Pollution Control Board may be considered as appropriate agencies for this purpose.  
 
9.3 MONITORING PERFORMANCE OF ASSETS AND OUTCOME OF THE 
PROJECT  
 
A detailed plan of monitoring the perform ance of assets as well as the outcome of 
project, which is reflected in the river water quality, must be prepared covering, among other 
things, the name of the monitoring agency, parameters to be monitored and their frequencies 
and presented in the DPR. Th e NMCG will assign this work to reputed academic / R&D 
institutions and will bears the expenses. However, there is a need for a dedicated person to 
collect data from the monitoring institution,  create data bases,  study and analyse it to see if any 
corrective measure is required to be taken at the local level. Expenditure on this dedicated cell 
should be included in the cost estimates.  
 
 Directions have been issued by CPCB vide notification dated Mar 02, 2015 (Annexure 
V) for online monitoring of influent and effluents of highly polluting industries, CETPs etc. 
Such similar / suitable devices if installed on STPs dealing with municipal se wage as well 
would be helpful in proper interpretation of results and taking timely remedial measures on 
their performance.    
 Page 69 CHAPTER 10: COMPLETION SCHEDULE  
 
Completion schedule for every component scheme of the project should be prepared 
and should be w atched by the executing agency. Generally completion schedules are prepared 
without considering the odds that would be faced during its implementation and hence most 
projects are delayed. Completion schedule should, therefore, be prepared on a realistic ba sis. It 
should be presented in the form of a PERT/CPM and Gantt  chart for monitoring purposes.  
 
Completion schedule should be accompanied by a quarterly physical and financial 
progress schedule. This should form the basis of monitoring of expenditure and o btaining 
grants from MoEF on a quarterly basis. Upon completion of the project, a completion report is 
submitted in a standard format. This format should be presented in the  DPR and is given as 
Annexure –VI. Utilization certificates for the funds released  by NMCG/MoWR, RD&GR shall 
be submitted in the formats given as Annexure VII.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 Page 70 CHAPTER 11: ENVIRONMENT IMPACT ASSESSMENT  AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN  
 
 
This chapter deals with the assessment of impact on Environment of l&D and STP schemes 
proposed and preparation of Impact Management Plan to minimize environmental impacts. 
For making such an assessment, baseline (pre -project) information about the compone nts. 
that are expected to be affected either negatively or positively has to be gathered.  
11.1 Components of Environment Affected  
 
The baseline situation is that the drains carry sewage to the river thus adversely 
affecting its physical, chemical and biological parameters and adding, among other things, 
pathogens.  
 
Thus drains carrying sewage potentially affects the environment. If t he drains are 
intercepted and the water is treated in Sewage Treatment Plants to the desired standards before 
it is discharged into the river, the adverse impacts of these wastewaters on the river is 
eliminated and water becomes suitable for the uses corre sponding to the water quality of the 
river achieved as a result of implementation of the project of I&D and Treatment of the sewage 
carried in the drains.  
 
The following components are likely to be affected and the impact on them should be 
assessed:  
i. Air  
ii. Ground/ Surface water   
iii. Soil  
 
Methodology  
The steps in studying environmental impacts of proposed project shall be:  
• Phase -I Environmental Site Assessment of proposed project sites  
• Alternative site assessment study  
• Project feasibility study  
 
From above studies, environmental issues of the related work can be known.   The 
project feasibility report can come up with various kinds of pollution sources, nature and 
pathways of pollutants.  
 
Data collection of secondary data OR baseline study for pr imary data can be carried 
out. Then environmental impact assessment on present baseline environment can be studied. 
The mitigation measures can be planned to minimize the impacts.  
 
11.2 Impact Management Plan:  
 
The I&D and STP projects have generally favourabl e impact on the components of social 
environment. If, however, some components are assessed to be adversely  affected , a 
management plan must be prepared to keep the values of the component within acceptable 
limits. The following steps to be considered for impact management plan.  
  
 Page 71 i. Baseline study of environmental parameters: Brief description of baseline environmental 
conditions (ambient air quality, surface and ground water quality, noise quality, 
ecological setting based on secondary data sources of recent  origin of last 1 -2 years or 
so).  The baseline data for one week or so may be generated as site by appointing a NABL 
accredited laboratory  
ii. Environmental impacts (a brief description) of the envisaged project on the present 
baseline environment during construction and operational period  
iii. Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to be prepared to minimize the impacts  and 
bring them to acceptable levels . 
iv. EMP costs to be estimated for environment protection and safety principally during 
construction and operatio n period.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Page 72 CHAPTER 12: GOVERNANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACTION PLAN (GAAP)  
 
 The Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) is to minimize accountability 
risks to the NMCG Program. Specific arrangements shall be proposed to mitigate these risks 
and to ensure that funds are used effectively and efficiently. The main purpose of the GAAP is 
to ensure that the NMCG  Program’s objectives are achieved with avoidance of all kinds of  
internal/external risks. This GAAP summarizes the mitigation measures being taken as a part 
of program. The mitigation measures are grouped into three categories: (i) Implementation 
Arrangements; (ii) Transparency and Citizen Voice; and (iii) Grievance Re dressal.   
 
 Following needs to be done for the GAAP:  
 
i. Disclosure and dissemination of information: As per the  Municipality Disclosure Act, 
RTI and NGRBA guidelines on stakeholders’ consultation would be adhered for the 
purpose of information dissemination . The disclosure of information should be made on a 
regular basis to the public. This is to be carried out in close coordination with 
communication and public outreach activities.  
 
ii. Under RTI Act , the disclosure applies to all public project related documen ts, including 
but not limited to project components and sub -components, cost estimates, procurement 
plans, details of tender notices, details of award of contracts and contract amounts, selection 
of consultants/contractors, and details of officials impleme nting the project.  
 
iii. Use of Social Audits . Social Audit, a viable instrument of sustainable program delivery, is 
in fact People’s Audit, which provides a succinct view of performance based on society’s 
perceptions and analysis at large. Citizen’s Monitoring Committee will perform Social 
Audit in a manner prescribed by the Government of India.  
 
iv. Adherence to the RTI Act. In addition, in compliance with the requirements of the Right 
to Information (RTI) Act (2005), the project shall provide information voluntarily and on 
demand as prescribed by law.  As per the RTI Act, the project will ensure proactive 
disclosure and sharing of information with key stakeholders, including with communities 
and beneficiaries.  
 
v. Grievance Redressal System: The purpose of a robust and responsive grievance redressal  
syste m is to ensure that any query or complaint with regard to any aspect of project 
implementation and management is fairly heard and promptly addressed. The development 
of an integrated system will enable the integration of feedback from the public, effective  
handling of complaints, and immediate automatic updates on the status of response. A GR 
system will be established with Grievance Redressal Cells (GRCs), with necessary officers, 
officials and systems at the local EA level which will be integrated with ot her levels. 
Grievances may be submitted through various media, including in person, in written form 
to a noted address, through a toll free phone line or through direct calls to concerned 
officials, and online. All local contact information and options for  complaint submission 
will be available on site on local information boards.  
 
The estimated cost for the GAAP arrangements would be worked out to cover the following 
expenses during construction and O&M:  
 
• On CMC’s Social Audits, Information Cell   
 Page 73 • Running t he Grievance Redressal Cell    
 Page 74 CHAPTER 13: COST ESTIMATES  
 
Estimation of Cost of Some Items  
 
Each of the following items has been treated as a component scheme of the project in 
the town. These items take care of the  requirements of all the component schemes in the town.  
i. Awareness generation and public participation  
ii. Training, human resources development and capacity building  
iii. Institutional development & strengthening  
iv. Monitoring & evaluation  
 
Based on survey and invest igation, data collection and design criteria, detailed 
estimates may be prepared, as given in the respective chapter. The project cost may be provided 
in the format given in the table 13.1, under the following subheads for each scheme:  
 
Table 13. 1: Abstract of Cost of Works Proposed  
(CW = Civil Works; EM = Electrical and Mechanical Works)  
SN Items  Quantities  Estimated Cost,  
Rs. la kh Remarks  
CW EM Total  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
A Items on which centage is 
admissible       
1 Interception of drains        
2 Diversion Sewers,        
 Sewers by open trench method,       
 Sewers by trenchless method,       
 Sub Total Sewers ,       
3 Sewage Pumping Stations 
(SPS)       
 MPS at -----      
 IPS at ----      
       
 Sub Total SPS      
4 Rising Mains,       
 From SPS at ----       
 From SPS at ----       
       
 Sub Total Rising Mains       
5 STPs , including office building, lab 
& equipment, campus development, 
boundary wall, water supply, drainage, 
sewerage, internal & external 
electrification, SCADA and Online 
monitoring system etc.       
 ----Mld, at -----      
 ----Mld, at -----      
 Sub Total STPs       
6 Treated effluent disposal       
7 Reuse of treated effluent        
 Page 75 SN Items  Quantities  Estimated Cost,  
Rs. la kh Remarks  
CW EM Total  
8 Approach road and protection 
works, if any       
9 Special T&P       
10 Others (specify)       
 Sub Total (A) Basic Capital 
Cost       
B Centage       
 Cost of project preparation @ 
4% as per NGRBA guidelines 
(maximum)       
 Cost of project supervision @  
4% as per NGRBA guidelines 
(maximum)       
 Sub Total B       
C Items on which no centage is 
admissible       
 O&M cost for 1st15 years       
 Power connection       
 Land acquisition      To be 
provided by 
State 
government  
 Environmental Sanitation and 
Management Plan (ESAMP)       
 Communication & Public 
Outreach       
 Governance and Accountability 
Plan (GAPP)       
 Monitoring and Evaluation       
 Third Party Assurance and 
Quality Check       
 Cost of environmental 
clearances / permissions       
 Cost of annual fee for water and 
royalty on silt  as appli cable      
 Others (specify)       
 Sub Total C       
       
 Total Cost of project A+B+C       
 
On many occasions, land is to be acquired involving an elaborate procedure under the 
land acquisition act. Projects are often delayed on this account. Such situations must be 
avoided.  As per the present policy, the cost of land for SPS/STP works is to be borne by the 
State Govt.   
  
 Page 76 Cost estimates of other components should be based on the detail ed bill of quantities, 
specifications of materials structures and rates as per the latest SORs. It is generally seen that 
latest and updated SORs are always not available for the city. This results in underestimation 
of cost involving revision in cost. It is necessary to note that NMCG does not entertain any 
revised cost estimate after the project is approved and revision in cost, if any, would have to be 
borne by the implementing agency only. Care should, therefore, be taken that estimates are 
prepared tak ing the following into consideration.  
 
Non-schedule items should be estimated on the basis of the prevailing market cost and 
budgetary offers from 2 or 3 reputed firms. In case some sewers are proposed to be laid by 
trenchless technology, latest SOR approv ed by the respective state agency or Indian Society 
for Trenchless Technology may be adopted for working out estimates. Copies of quotations of 
Electro -Mechanical items should be provided in the DPR  
 
Estimated cost of STP may also be worked out based on recently awarded cost of 
similar capacities of STPs (average cost of different STPs) based on conventional technologies 
in the concerned State. If the awarded cost is not available in the concerned State, the awarded 
cost in the neighbouring State may be a dopted.  Costs of STPs constructed elsewhere on latest 
effluent parameters should be given in support of estimated cost adopted in the DPR.  
 
Contingencies  are not permissible as  a separate item and is covered under centage  
 
The estimates should mention spe cifications of all proposed works and reference of 
SOR used for adopting the rates. All applicable cess / taxes / GST should be included in 
estimated costs of items.  
 
It takes some time to complete the DPR and then submit it to NMCG through State 
Governmen t and finally appraisal and approval of DPR in NMCG. Sometimes, when the 
project cost is high, the proposal may require approvals at higher levels in Government which 
is a time consuming process. Therefore, implementing agency should be able to foresee 
escalation, if any, in the cost on this account and should make appropriate provisions in the 
project cost accordingly.  
 
 Bills of quantities and specifications must be presented in a separate volume.  
 
For each major component, the estimated cost needs to be justified. For this purpose, it 
would be advisable to compare the cost estimate with that of a similar one approved earlier 
after necessary updating.  This would help expediting approval in NMCG.   
 
 Necessary provision may be made in the estimate for Cent age as approved by NMCG.  
 
The DPR would also be used for preparation of Notice Inviting Tender ( NIT) and  
tendering the project. It should, therefore, contain complete engineering drawings, longitudinal 
sections etc. of the proposal that would be needed for NIT as well as monitoring of project 
implementation.  
  
AHEC -IITR/NMCG/2017  Page 77 Annexure – I: Map of the Ganga R iver Basin  
  
 Page 78 Annexure – II: Line diagram of Ganga River  
 
  
 
 Page 79  
Annexure –  III: Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring Order, 2005  
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS  
NOTIFICATION  
 New Delhi, the 17th June, 2005  
   
S.O. 2151 – WHEREAS the Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) was constituted 
by the Central Government vide Order No. S.O. 583 (E) dated the 29th May, 2001 and No. S.O. 
635 (E) dated the 27th October, 2004 to exercise powers under section 5 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) for issuing directions and for taking measures with respect 
to matters referred to in clauses (ix), (xi), (xii) and (xiii) of sub -section (2) of sectio n 3 of the 
said Act and to standardize method(s) for water quality monitoring and to ensure quality of 
data generation for utilization thereof and certain other purposes;  
  
AND WHEREAS it is necessary and expedient to evolve water quality assessment and 
monitoring protocol as directed by the Water Quality Assessment Authority in order to 
maintain uniformity in the procedure for water quality monitoring mechanism by all 
monitoring agencies, departments, Pollution Control Boards and such other agencies so tha t 
water related action plans may be drawn up on the basis of reliable data;  
  
AND WHEREAS the uniform process on water quality monitoring shall provide frequency of 
monitoring, procedure for sampling, parameters for analysis, analytical techniques, quality  
assurance and quality control system, infrastructure requirement for laboratories, procedure for 
data processing, reporting and dissemination and such other matters as the Central Government 
deems necessary for the said purpose, both for surface and groun d water;  
  
AND WHEREAS due to the deterioration of the river water quality, health and livelihood of 
the downstream people are being severely affected and concerns are raised time and again;  
  
AND WHEREAS  the immediate maintenance and restoration of ‘whol esomeness’ of the river 
water quality is the mandate under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
(6 of 1974) and that of maintenance of the ground water quality by the Central Ground Water 
Authority constituted under the provisions of t he Environment (Protection) Act, 1986;  
  
AND WHEREAS  sub -rule (4) of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, provides 
that whenever it appears to the Central Government that it is in public interest to do so, it may 
dispense with the requireme nt of notice under clause(a) of sub -rule(3) of the said rule”,  
  
AND WHEREAS the Central Government is of the opinion that it is in public interest to 
dispense with the requirement of notice under clause (a) of sub -rule (3) of rule 5 of the said 
rules to issue the Order.  
  
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, the Central Government hereby makes the following order, namely: - 
1. Short title and commencement: -  
   
 Page 80 a) This order may be called the Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring 
Order, 2005”.  
b) It shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.  
  
2. Application: - It shall apply to all organizations, agencies and any other body monitoring 
surface and ground water  quality for observance of uniform protocol on water quality 
monitoring.  
3. Definitions: -  
  
In this Order, unless the context otherwise requires –  
  
I.  “Agencies” means water quality monitoring agencies (government or non -
government, local bodies) and other organizations including research and 
academic institutions involved in water quality monitoring of surface and 
ground waters;  
II.  “Authority” means the Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) 
constituted under sub -sections (1) and (2) of section 3 of the En vironment 
(Protection) Act, 1986;  
III.  “Baseline stations” means the monitoring location where there is no influence 
of human activities on water quality;  
IV.  “Flux stations or Impact stations” means the location for measuring the mass 
of particular pollutant on main river stem for measuring the extent of pollution 
due to human interference or geological feature at any point of time and is 
necessary for measuring impact of pollution control measures adopted;  
V.  “Monitoring” means standardized measurement of identifi ed parameters in 
order to define status and trends of water quality;  
VI.  “Protocol” means a system of uniform water quality monitoring mechanism 
developed by the Water Quality Assessment Authority constituted under sub -
sections (1) and (3) of section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986;  
VII.  “Quality Assurance Programme” m eans a programme described in paragraph 
12 of this Order.  
VIII.  “Trend station” means the monitoring location designed to show how a 
particular point on a watercourse varies over time due, normally, to the 
influence of man’s activities.  
IX.  “Water quality monitori ng network” means a systematic planning for 
collection, preservation and transportation, storage, analysis of water samples 
and dissemination of data for national water bodies restricted to surface and 
ground water in the country.  
4. Monitoring station and fr equency of sampling: -  
  
1) The frequency of sampling in respect of surface water shall be as follows: - 
a) all the stations shall be a combination of Baseline, Trend and Flux or Impact 
stations  
b) the Baseline stations shall be monitored four times a year for peren nial rivers 
and lakes and three to four times a year for seasonal rivers. Trend stations shall 
be monitored with an increased frequency of once in a month i.e. twelve times 
in a year. Flux or Impact stations shall be monitored twelve or twenty -four times 
in a year depending upon pollution potential or importance of water use.  
c) all agencies shall follow the sampling frequency and parameters for analysis of 
surface water as mentioned in the Table – I given below:   
 Page 81   
 
 
Table – I Frequencies and parameters for an alysis of surface water samples    
1 2 3 
Type of 
Station  Frequency  Parameters  
Baseline  Perennial rivers 
and lakes:  
  
Four times a year 
(seasonal)  
  
Seasonal rivers:  
  
3-4 times (at 
equal spacing) 
during flow 
period  
  
Lakes:  
4 times a year 
(seasonal ) A. Pre-monsoon: Once a year  
 
Analyse 25 parameters as listed below:  
 
a) General: Colour, Odour, Temperature, pH, Electrical Conductivity 
(EC), Dissolved Oxygen (DO), Turbidity, Total Dissolved Solid 
(TDS)  
b) Nutrients: Ammoniacal Nitrogen (NH 4-N), Nitrite & Nitrate  
Nitrogen (NO 2 + NO 3) Total Phosphate (Total P)  
c) Demand parameters: Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD)    
d) Major ions: Sodium (Na), Potassium (K), Calcium (Ca), 
Magnesium (Mg), Carbonate (CO 3) Bicarbonate (HCO 3 Chloride 
(CL), Sulphat e (SO 4) 
e) Other inorganic: Fluoride (F), Boron (B) and other location 
specific parameter, if any  
f) Microbiological: Total coliform and Faecal Coliform  
 
B. Rest of the year (after the pre -monsoon sampling) at every 
three months interval  
Analyse 10 parameters: Colour, Odour, Temperature, pH, EC, DO, 
NO 2 + NO 3, BOD, Total coliform and Faecal Coliform   
 Page 82 Trend or 
impact 
or flux  Once every 
month starting 
April -May  
(pre-monsoon) 
i.e. 12 times a 
year A. Pre-monsoon: Analyse 25 parameters as listed for baseline 
monitoring  
B. Other months: Analyse 15 parameters as listed below  
(a)  General : Colour, Odour, Temp, pH, EC, DO and Turbidity  
(b)  Nutrients : NH 3 - N, NO 2 + NO 3, Total P  
(c)  Organic Matter : BOD, COD  
(d)  Major ions :  Cl 
(e)  Microbiological: Total and Faecal coliforms  
C. Micropollutant: Once in a year/pre monsoon.  
a) Pesticides – Alpha Benzenehexachloride (BHC), Beta BHC, Gama 
BHC  
(Lindane), OP -Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (OP -DDT), PP -DDT, 
Alpha  
Endosulphan, Beta Endosulphan, Aldrin,  
Diedrin, Carbaryl (Carbamat e), 
Malathian, Methyl Parathian, Anilophos,  
Chloropyriphos  
b) Toxic Metals: - Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Mercury (Hg), Zinc 
(Zn), Chromium (Cr), Lead (Pb) Nickel (Ni), Iron (Fe)  
       (The parameters may be selected based on local needs)  
 Note:  
 
I.The parameters mentioned in the above Table shall be the minimal requirement. This does 
not, however, restrict analysis of more parameters depending upon the specific 
requirements of the analyzing agency and its manpower availability.  
II. For lakes or reservoirs, monitoring of additional parameters, like total Kjeldhal 
Nitrogen, Chlorophyll, total Plankton count and productivity, shall be included in the 
list of parameters.  
III. If biomonitoring is done in river or lakes or reservoirs, additional specific parameters 
are to be considered.  
  
2) Ground Water  
  
The frequency of sampling in respect of ground water shall be as follows:  
  
a. All stations shall be classified as Baseline stations  
b. 20-25% of Baseline stations shall be classified as Trend stations where there is a 
perceived problem.  
c. All agencies shall follow the sampling frequency and parameters for analysis of ground 
water as mentioned in the Table -2 given below:  
  
5. Sample Collection  
 
(1) The procedure for sample collection in respect of surface water shall be as under : 
  
a. Samples for Baseline and Trend stations shall be collected from well -mixed section of 
the river or main stem 30 cm below the water surface using a Dissolved Oxygen (DO) 
sampler or weighted bottle.   
 Page 83 b. Samples for impact stations shall be collected from the point of interest, such as bathing 
ghat, downstream  of point discharge, water supply intakes and other sources.  
c. The Dissolved Oxygen (DO) in the sample shall be fixed immediately after collection 
and Dissolved Oxygen (DO) analysis shall be done either in the field or in laboratory.  
  
(2) The procedure for sample collection in respect of ground water shall be as 
under:  
  
a) Open dug wells, which are not in use or have been abandoned, shall 
not be considered as  water quality monitoring station. However, such 
well could be considered for water level monitoring.  
b) Weighted sample bottle to collect sample from an open well about 30 
cm below the surface of water may be used. The plastic bucket, which 
is likely to skim  the surface layer only, shall not be used.  
c) samples from the production tube wells shall be collected after running 
the well for about five minutes.  
d) Non-production piezometers shall be purged using a submersible 
pump. The purged water volume shall equal 4 to 5 times the standing 
water volume, before sample is collected.  
e) for bacteriological samples, when collected from tube wells or hand 
pump, the spout or outlet of the pump shall be sterilized under flame 
by spirit lamp before collection of sample in contai ner. 
Table – 2 Frequencies and parameters for analysis of Ground Water samples   
   
 Page 84 Note: -  
I. The parameters mentioned in the above Table shall be the minimal requirement. This 
does not, however, restrict analysis of more parameters depending upon the specific 
requirements of the analyzing agency and its manpower availability.  
II. If chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) value exceeds 20 mg/ l, the sample shall be 
analysed for Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) also.  
  
6. Sample preservation and transportation  
  
1) The type of containers and sample preservation to be adopted shall be as mentioned 
in the Table -3 below:  
  
 
Table – 3  
1 2 3 1 2 3 
Type of 
Station  Frequency  Parameters  
Baseline  Twice a year  
(Pre and post 
monsoon season)  
  
  A. Pre and Post Monsoon Season: Analyse 20 parameters as 
listed below:  
a. General: Colour, Odour, Temperature, pH, EC, TDS  
b. Nutrients: NO 2 + NO 3, orthophosphate  
c. Demand Parameter: COD   
d. Major Ions: NA+, K +, Ca++, Mg++, CO 3--, HCO 3-; 
Cl, SO 4,--%Na & SAR  
e. Other inorganics: F, B and other location -specific 
parameters, if any  
  
Trend    
Twice a year  
(Pre and post 
monsoon)    
A.   April -May: Analyse 20 parameters as listed for 
Baseline monitoring  
 B.   Other times: Analyse 14 parameters as listed below: - 
a) General: Colour, Odour, Temperature, EC, pH, TDS, 
%Na & SAR  
b) Nutrients: NO 2 + NO 3, orthophosphate  
c) Demand parameter: COD  
d) Major ions: Cl  
e) Other inorganics: F,B  
f) Microbiological: Total coliform and Faecal coliform  
C. Micropollutant (parameters may be selected based on 
local needs):  
a. Pesticides - Alpha BHC, Beta BHC, Gama BHC (Lindane), 
OP-DDT, PP -DDT, Alpha Endosulphan, Beta 
Endosulpha n, Aldrin, Dieldrin, Carbaryl (Carbamate), 
Malathian, Methyl, Parathian, Anil ophos, 
Chloropyriphos.  
b. Toxic Metals – As, Cd, Hg, Zn, Cr, Pb, Ni, Fe  
(Pesticides and Toxic metals may be analysed once a year in 
pre monsoon on selected locations)   
 Page 85 Analysis  Container  Preservation  
General  Glass, PE  40C, dark  
BOD  Glass, PE  40C, dark  
COD, NH 3, NO 2, NO 3 Glass, PE  H2SO 4, PH<2  
Coliform  Glass, PE, Sterilised  40C, dark  
DO BOD bottle  DO fixing chemicals  
Fluoride  PE None  
P Glass  None  
Pesticides  Glass, Teflon  40C, dark  
Toxic metals  Glass, PE  HNO 3, PH<2  
   
2) Samples shall be transported to concerned laboratory as soon as possible, preferably 
within forty -eight hours of collection  
3) Analysis  for coliforms shall be started within twenty -four hours of collection of 
sample. If time is exceeded, it should be recorded with the result  
4) Samples containing microgram / 1 metal level should be stored at 40C and analyzed 
as soon as possible. If the conce ntration is of mg /1 level, it can be stored for up to 
6 months, except mercury, for which the limit is 5 weeks.  
5) Sample Identification for the water sample analysis for surface and ground water 
samples shall be as mentioned in the Form -I and Form -II. 
  
7. Sample records  
  
1) Each laboratory shall have a bound register, which shall be used for registering 
samples as they are received. A format for sample receipt register is annexed as 
Form -III. 
2) The Laboratory In -charge shall maintain a register for assignment o f work to 
specific analyst.  
  
8. Analytical techniques  
  
Each agency shall follow the analytical techniques prescribed in the Standard Methods 
for Analysis of Water and Wastewater published by American Public Health 
Association (Latest Edition) or Bureau of I ndian Standard(BIS) Methods for Testing 
Water and Wastewater -methods of sampling and testing (physical and chemical) 
(IS:3025)  
9. Analysis records and data validation  
  
A recommended format for recording data including all parameters except toxic metals 
and t race organics is enclosed as Form – IV. Report of heavy metals and trace organics 
as per Table 2 may be recorded separately. Validation check should be performed in 
the laboratory on completion of the analysis. The results of laboratory analyses shall be 
entered in the format provided in Form – II for validation.  
  
 
 
 
10. Manpower requirements in laboratories  
   
 Page 86 The manpower requirements shall be optimized by the concerned monitoring agencies 
in order to get the maximum utilization of mandays, for timely completion of analysis . 
  
11. Data Processing, Reporting and Dissemination  
  
Each monitoring agency shall process the analytical data and report the data after 
validation to the Data Centre at the Central Pollution Control Board. The Central 
Pollution Control Board shall store the data and disseminate through website or 
electronic mail to various users on demand.  
  
12. Quality Assurance and Accreditation of Laboratories  
  
The Quality  Assurance Programme for the laboratories of various agencies shall contain 
a set of operating principles, written down and agreed upon by the organization, 
delineating specific functions and responsibilities of each person involved. Each 
laboratory of wat er quality monitoring agencies shall follow the guidelines of Quality 
Assurance Programme prescribed by their respective Central Laboratory or 
Headquarters and shall participate in Inter Laboratory Quality Assurance Programme 
like Proficiency Testing (PT) organized by them or any other agency on regular basis. 
The water quality laboratories shall seek recognition from the ministry of Environment 
and Forests, Government of India or accreditation from National Accreditation Board 
for Testing and Calibration L aboratories (NABL) under the Ministry of Science and 
Technology, Government of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Page 87 MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS  
NOTIFICATION  
 New Delhi, the 16th December, 2005  
 
 
 S.O.1799 (E)  – Whereas by the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, number S.O. 133 (E), dated the 4th February, 2003 (hereinafter 
referred to as the said notification), the Central Government notified Matheran and surroun ding 
region in the State of Maharashtra as an Eco -sensitive Zone and imposed restrictions on 
industries, operations, processes and other developmental activities in the said region;  
  
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by Sub -section (1) r ead with clause (v) of 
Sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) and rule 
5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, the Central Government hereby makes the 
following further amendments in the said notification , namely: - 
 
In the said notification - 
 
in paragraph 4, in sub -paragraph (n), after the words “in addition, one ambulance and one fire 
engine as stand by”, the words “railways and ropeways” shall be inserted;  
1. in Annexure – A, for the brackets, words and fi gure “ (see section 2)”, the brackets, 
words and figure “(see paragraph 2)”, shall be substituted;  
2. in Annexure – B, for the brackets, words and figure “(see section 2)”, the brackets, 
words and figure “(see paragraph 2)”, shall be substituted;  
3. in Annexur e – C, for the brackets, words and figure “(see section 2)”, the brackets, 
words and figure “(see paragraph 2)”, shall be substituted;  
4. in Annexure – D  
a) for the brackets, words, figures and letters “[see Section 4(a)(iv)(c)]” the 
bracket, words, figures an d letters “[see paragraph 4(a)(iv)(3)]” shall be 
substituted;  
b) in sub -heading 3, relating to Green Zone – 1, in item (j) of entry 3.1, after the 
words “small check dams for watershed management”, the word “ropeways” 
shall be inserted;  
c) in sub -heading 4, relating to Urbanisable Zone -2,- 
I. in item (n) of entry 4.1, after the words “small check dams for watershed 
management”, the word “ropeways.” shall inserted;  
II. in entry 4.2, for the word “paragraph”, the word ‘entry’ shall be 
substituted.  
  
[F.No. J -20011/1/9 9-LA-III] 
R. CHANDRAMOHAN, Jt. Secy.  
 
Note:  The principal notification was published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, vide 
Number S.O.133(E) dated the 4th February, 2003, and subsequently amended vide Numbers 
S.O. 83 (E) dated the 16th January, 2004 .   
   
 Page 88 Annexure –IV: Suggestive Structure of the DPRs  
 
Chapters  Description  
  
i. Table of Contents  
Ii List of Abbreviations  
Iii Salient Features of the Project  
Iv Executive Summary  / General Abstract of Cost  
 PROJECT REPORT  
  
1.1 Authority for preparation of project  
  
1.2 Brief Description of the project area  
 Brief history of the town  
 Geographical location  
 Climate  
 Topography  
 Administrative divisions  
 Commercial aspects  
 Industrial activities  
 Educational activities  
 Cultural activities  
 Religious activities  
 Socio –Economic status  
 Town Management  
 Soil characteristics and sub soil water level  
 Drains – Total nos., nos. discharging into river(s), nos. intercepted  
 City Sanitation Plan, if any – Date of preparation/sanction, copy of Executive 
Summary and abstract of cost estimate to be attached  
 Master plan of development of the city, if any - Date of preparation/sanction, copy 
of Executive Summary and abstract of cost estimate to be attached  
 Sewerage Master Plan, if any - Date of preparation/sanction, copy of Executive 
Summary and abstract of cost estimate to be attached  
 Feasibility Report, if any - Date of preparation/sanction, copy of Executive 
Summary and abstract of cost estimate to be attached  
 Agency responsible for execution and O&M of works, brief note on agencies  
 Hrs. of availability of power at the sites of SPS / STPs  
  
1.3 Existing sewerage works  
 Existing, under execution, sanctioned but not yet started.  
 Condition assessment report of existing sewers, SPS & STPs with details of CC 
TV survey, stating dia/length of sewers to be desilted, rehabilitated, abandoned 
(with reasons) etc.  
 Proposed renovation, up gradation, augmentation  etc. of the existing sewerage 
works  
  
1.4 River water quality  
 Water quality standards of river water quality   
 Page 89  Actual river water quality u/s, d/s,  u/s of water supply intakes, other important 
places along with copies of test reports  
  
1.5 Population  
 Census population of the last 5 decades, area, no. of households, growth rate, 
density of population, slum population  
 Past floating population data  
 Population projections as per the City Master Plan  
 Population projections for base year, 10, 15, 30 y ears – For permanent and floating 
population, along with basis of projected floating population  
 Population Projections of each district in design years  
  
1.6 Water Supply  
 Recommended rates of water supply as per CPHEEO Manual on water supply  
 Status of water supply  
 Proposals for augmentation of water supply system  
  
1.7 Volume of Sewage Generation  
 Interception Factor  
 Peak Factors  
 Sewage flow calculations based on rate of water supply and projected population 
(including floating) in base, 10, 15, 30 years, including flow from private bore wells 
and infiltration of sub soil water  
 
 Sewage flow actually measured in drains/sewers along with copies of reports of 
measurements  
 Design sewage flows adopted along with comments on its normative and actual 
values  
 Design sewage flows in each sewerage district as adopted  
  
1.8 Raw Sewage Quality  
 Test reports of raw sewage in drains for parameters as per guide lines  
 Test reports of raw sewage in sewers for parameters as per guide lines  
 Test reports of sewage flow in sewers from nearby town(s) having same rate of 
water supply and similar socioeconomic conditions  
 Raw sewage quality assumed for design of STP(s) along with basis  
  
1.9 Treated Sewage Quality  
 Standards for treated sewage  
 Summary of treated effluent quality of existing STPs for the last 2 years  
  
2.0 Interception Works of Drains  
  
2.1 Sewer Network  
 Hydraulic Design of Sewer Network, District wise  
 Design of sewer Bedding  
 Life cycle cost analysis of pipes proposed in gravity sewers, as per  NRCD, MoEF 
letter dt. July 8, 2002   
 Report on condition assessment and integration of existing works   
 Page 90  Sewers by trenchless method  
  
2.2 Sewage Pumping Stations  
 Hydraulic Designs of Sewage Pumping Stations  
 Design of capacities of Pumping Plants of sewage pumping stations  
 Design of capacities of Generators  
 Condition assessment and integration of existing SPS  
  
2.3 Rising Mains  
 Design of Economical sizes of Rising Mains  
  
2.4 Sewage Treatment Plants  
 Details of existing STPs – Capacities, year of construction, type, status  
 Capacities of proposed STPs  
 Characteristics of raw sewage on existing and proposed STPs  
 Characteristics of treated effluent on existing and proposed STPs  
 Disposal of treated effluent  
 Existing and future plan of reuse / recycling of treated waste water from STPs to 
be given.  
 Life Cycle Cost analysis for different technologies of treatment of waste  
 Land available and required for STPs  
 Electrical Load List of S.T.Ps  
 Condition assessment and integration of existing STPs  
 Production of biogas and its use for power generation  
2.5 Other provisions  
 Land available and required for various components  
 Staff Quarters  
 Permission from Forest, Railways, Telephone etc departments  
 Special T&P  
 Land cost in and around the town - copy of rates be attached  
2.9 Electricity from solar and micro hydro  
3.0 Cost estimates  
3.1 Operation and Maintenance  
 O&M cost for 15 years  
 Annual O&M Cost of Works (component wise)  
 Annual manpower cost  
 Annual cost of power  
 Annual expenditure on repairs and maintenance  
 Staff required for maintenance  
 Power required for maintenance  
 O&M Recovery Plan for  15 years  
 Economics  
  
4.0 Implementation Programme  
 PERT Chart  
 Schedule of demand of funds  
  
5.0 Miscellaneous   
 Page 91 5.1 Environmental Sanitation and Management Plan (ESAMP)  
5.2 Communication & Public Outreach  
5.3 Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) and Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism (GRM)  
5.4 Training, Human Resources Development and Capacity Building  
5.6 Project Management and Institutional Development  
5.7 Capacity of ULB – financial, material, human resources related to implement, 
operate and maintain the WWMS  
 Proposed strengthening plan  
5.8 Monitoring and Evaluation  
5.9 Third Party Assurance and Quality Check  
  
 ANNEXURE S 
 Data collected as mentioned in chapter 2  
 Executive Summary of City Development Plan, as approved  
 Executive Summary of City Sanitation Plan, as approved  
 Executive Summary of FR of sewerage, as approved  
 Approval of City Sanitation Plan by  the State Government  
 Approval of City Sanitation Plan by  NMCG  
 Approval of Feasibility Report of sewerage by  the State Government  
 Approval of Feasibility Report by  NMCG  
 Test Reports of River Water Quality, including those by CPCB, SPCB and other 
agencies  
 Discharge measurement reports of discharge of drains  
 Test reports of raw sewage in drains  
 Test reports of raw sewage in sewers  
 Test reports of sewage flow in sewers from nearby town(s)  
 Test reports of treated effluent from existing STPs  
 Rates of Land Acquisition in and around the town (copy of rates be attached in 
support)  
 Sub Soil   characteristics and sub soil water data  
 Rates of PWD for reinstatement of roads  
 Budgetary Offers of various components (separate cover, if voluminous)  
  
9 ESTIMATES  
 Drains  
 Interception of drains and allied works  
 Sewers  
 Civil works of SPS  
 EM works of SPS  
 Rising mains  
 STPs  
 Electric Power Sub Station  
 Staff Quarters   
 Approach road  
 Permission from Departments  
 Shifting of Electric Cables, Lines etc./ Telephone Poles, Cables etc.  
  Special T&P   
 Page 92  Land Acquisition  
 Environmental Sanitation and Management Plan (ESAMP)  
 Communication & Public Outreach  
 Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) and Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism (GRM)  
 Training, Human Resources Development and Capacity Building  
 Project Management and Institutional Development  
 Monitoring and Evaluation  
 Third Party Assurance and Quality Check  
 Unit Estimates  
 Manhole, size wise  
 Boundary Wall  
 Steel Gate  
 Gully Pits  
 Roads  
  
10 DRAWINGS  
 General Drawings  
1.  Map of the Country and State Showing the Location of the Town  
2.  Map Showing Ganga River Basin and Location of Town  
3.  Base map of Town (Road, Railway track, Wards, Slum and important landmarks 
etc.) 
4.  Satellite Imagery of Town  
5.  Land use  Map/ Master Plan of Town (if any)  
6.  Map Showing overall drainage and their Outfall Point related to Town  
7.  Map of Town showing locations of industries, CETPs and points of, untreated / 
treated effluent outfalls of industries, etc.  
8.  Map Showing Contours for Town  
9.  Map Showing Existing Sewer Network for Town  
 Proposed Drawings  
10.  Key Plan of Proposed Scheme integrated with existing system along with GLs and 
ILs at critical points, drains, their points of outfall, proposed SPS, STPs (Capacity 
in MLD)  
11.  L-sections of sewers to show GLs/ ILs/ dia / length / type of sewers, profile of 
ground and sewers.  
12.  Location Map of Interception & Diversion of drain  
13.  Map Showing Proposed Drains Interception and Diversion (I & D) Works  
14.  Map Showing Proposed Fencing Stretches on various Drains (if considered)  
15.  Location Map of SPSs/STPs as per actual site layout (showing lat/long, important 
landmarks and site surroundings).  
16.  General Arrangement Drawing for Sewage Pumping Station  
17.  Layout Plan of Proposed/Existing STP with unit sizing, specific modification 
requirement (if any), Road, Guardroom, Staff quarter, Solar Panel, Plantation etc.  
18.  Hydraulic Flow Diagram for Proposed/Existing STP  
19.  Plan and Profile of Treated Effluent Reuse Pipe Line  
20.  Typical Details of Manhole (Various Sizes)  
21.  Typical House Connecting Chamber  
22.  Typical Sewer Bedding Details  
23.  Typical Boundary Wall   
 Page 93 24.  Typical Single Line Diagram for STP integrated with Solar Power (Electrical)  
25.  Typical Single Line Diagram for SPS and MPS (Electrical)  
26.  Typical Process and Instrumentation Diagram integrating with SCADA system  
27.  Typical cross -sectional drawing of drains (Existing & Proposed)  
 
 
 
   
 Page 94 Annexure – V: Directions issued by CPCB vide notification dated Mar 02, 2015  For On 
Line Monitoring of Influent and Effluent Quality of Highly Polluting Industries  
 
 
 
 Page 95  
 
 
 Page 96  
  
 
 Page 97  
 
 
 Page 98  
 
 Page 99  
 
Guidelines for preparation of DPR for Interception and Diversion of Drains and STPs  
AHEC -IITR/NMCG/ 2015  Page 100 Annexure – VI: Completion Report  
(Part A)  
(General Abstract of Cost)  
1.      Name of the scheme:  
2. Sanctioned Amount:  
3. Date of sanction:  
4. Date of Scheduled start:  
5. Date of actual start:  
6. Date of Scheduled Completion:  
7. Date of actual completion  
8. Actual Expr.  
 
Certified   (1)      That there has been no material deviations from the sanctioned plans and specifications other than those approved by the 
competent authority.  
(2)     That the works have been completed as per specifications and completion drawings enclosed  
                     (3)     That the site has been cleared of all malba, rubbish and surplus materials, contractors’ hutments and his materials etc.  SI
. 
N
o Sub-
head/ 
compone
nt As per sanctioned 
Estimate  As executed  Variation  Reason
s for 
Variatio
n Cost as 
per 
executed 
quantity 
& Rates 
as per 
sanction
ed 
Estimate  Escalation  
Due 
to    variati
on in 
quantity 
Col. 12  
Col. 5  Escalatio
n 
Due to 
price 
variation 
Col. 8 - 
Col.5 - 
Col. 13  Remar
ks 
Ite
m Qt
y Am
t. Ite
m Qt
y Am
t. Savin
g (+)  Exce
ss (-) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Guidelines for preparation of DPR for Interception and Diversion of Drains and STPs  
AHEC -IITR/NMCG/ 2015  Page 101 COMPLETION REPORT (Part B)  
 
Name of the Scheme:                                                             Details of variations in the scope of work  
Component/Sub -head:  
                                                                  Sl. 
No Descripti
on of 
item of 
work  As per sanctioned 
Estimate  As executed  Variation  Reasons 
for 
Variation  Cost as 
per 
executed 
quantity 
& Rates 
as per 
sanctioned 
Estimate  Escalation  
Due 
to   variati
on in 
quantities 
col. 14 -
Col. 6.  Escalation  
Due to 
price 
variation 
Col. 10 - 
Col.  6  - 
Col. 15  Remarks  
Qty Unit Rate Amt
. Qty Unit Rate Amt
. Saving 
(+) Excess 
(-) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Guidelines for preparation of reports Under NRCP / NGRBA  
 
AHEC -IITR/NMCG/2015  Page 102  Annexure –VII: Utilisation Certificate  
 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation  
UTILISATION CERTIFICATE  
 
(To be sent in duplicate to the Ministry of Environment & Forests)  
for the financial year (Form____________   to _________________)  
1.         Title of  the Project/Scheme:  
2.         Name of the Organisation:  
3.         Principal Investigator:  
 
4.         Ministry Of Environment And Forests  
            letter No. and date of  
            sanctioning the project :  
5.         Amount brought forward from t he previous  
financial year quoting Ministry of Environment  
and Forests letter no. and date on which the authority  
to carry forward the said amount was given :  
6.         Amount received from Ministry  
            of Environment & Forests, during  
            the financial year (please give  
            No. and date of sanctions  
            Showing   the amount paid)  
7.         Total amount that was available for  
            expenditure (including commitment)  
            incurred during the Financial Year  
            (S. No. 5+S. No. 6)  
8.         Actual Expenditure (Excluding  
commitments) incurred during the financial year:  
9.         Unspent balance refunded if any  
            (Please give details of cheque  
            no. etc.)  
10.       Balance amount  available at the end of the  
 financial year:  
11.              Amount allowed to be carried forward to the next financial year vide letter no. and 
date:  
 
Certified that the expenditure of Rs. ______________________ (Rupees 
__________________ ) mentioned ag ainst column 8 was actually incurred on the Project / 
Scheme for the purpose for which it was sanctioned and balance amount is available on 
__________________ .  
(Signature of                             (Signature of                                         (Signature of Head  
Principal Investigator)                Registrar/ Accounts Officer)                   of the Organisation)  
 
ACCEPTED AND COUNTERSIGNED  
COMPETENT AUTHORITY  
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS  
 
 
 Guidelines for preparation of reports Under NRCP / NGRBA  
 
AHEC -IITR/NMCG/2015  Page 103  Form of Utilisation Certificate  
(Form GFR 19 -A) 
[See Rule 212(1)]  
 
Name of the Organisation  :   
 
Financial Year    :   
 
S. No.  Ministry of Environment and Forests Sanction for Released Amount  
Letter No.  Date  Amount (Rs. in Lakhs)  
    1.    
    
 
1. Certified that out of Rs. ---------  of grants -in-aid sanctioned during the year ----------  in 
favour of ----------------------------------  under Ministry of Environment and Forests letter 
No. ---------------------------------  dated -----------------  ,and Rs. -------------------- on 
account of unspent balance of the previous year,  a sum of  Rs. ---------------- ---  has 
been utilized during the period for purpose of  “ -------------------------------------- .” for 
which it was sanctioned and that the balance of Rs —-----------  remaining unutilized at 
the end of the year will be adjusted during -------------------  towards the grants -in-aid 
payable during the next year ---------------  
 
2. Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which the grants -in-aid was 
sanctioned have been duly fulfilled and that I have exercised the following checks to 
see tha t the money was actually utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned.  
 
 Kinds of checks exercised  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Signature …….….……….…..  
Designation ……….…………... Date …………….……………..  
Operating  
      
 
Countersigned _________________  
 
 Hkkjrh; izkS|ksfxdhlaLFkku] #M+dh  
O©dfYid ty ÅtkZdsUnz  
#M+dh&247 667 ¼mÙkjk[k.M½] Hkkjr  
INDIAN  INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, ROORKEE  
ALTERNATE HYDRO ENERGY CENTRE  
ROORKEE - 247 667 (Uttarakhand), INDIA  
Fax   :   (01332)  273517, 273560,  Phone: (01332)  274254, 285213,  
E-mail: ahec@iitr.ernet.in , aheciitr@gmail.com    1 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCE NOTE  
     No.59/RN/Ref./ Nov/2017  
For the use of Members of Parliament                            NOT FOR PUBLICATION1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NAMAMI GANGE PROGRAMME  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by Dr. Jayadev Sahu, Additional Director (23035025) and Shri Sai Ram C.V., Junior Library 
Assistant of Lok Sabha Secretariat under the supervision of Smt. Kalpana Sharma, Joint Secretary and 
Smt. Anita Khanna, Director.  reference r personal use of the Members in the discharge of their 
Parliamentary 
                                                           
The Reference Note is  for personal use of the Members in the discharge of their Parliamentary duties, and is not for 
publication.  This Service is not to be quoted as the source of information as it is based on the sources indicated at 
the end/in the text.   
 MEMBERS' REFERENCE SERVICE  
LARRDIS  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT, NEW DELHI  duties, AND NAMAMI GANGE PROGRAMME  
Introduction  
 Ganga is  considered as  the most sacred river in the  country with a unique 
cultural and spiritual significance.  It occupies  a specia l place in every Indian’s 
heart. Traversing over 2,500 km,  River Ganga is highly vene rated and millions of 
people from its origin in the Gangotri g lacier in the Himalayas to the Sunderbans 
delta in Bangladesh  depend on its water for their  livelihood . 
River Network  
 The River Ganga originates in the Himalayas with several major head -
streams – Alaknanda, Bhagirathi, Bhilangana, Dhauliganga, Mandakini,  Nandakini 
and Pindar, which progressively join together on or before Devaprayag. 
Descending in the plains, the river flows approximately southeast and is joined by 
several large streams such as Ramganga, Yamuna, Kosi, Gandak, Gomti, Sone, 
Karamnasa and Gh aghra to become an immense river in the plains below 
Allahabad. The river then flows through the Rajmahal hills and divides into two 
streams. The eastern branch – River Padma – flows southeast through Bangladesh 
to join the Brahmaputra and Meghna rivers be fore flowing into the sea. The south -
flowing branch – River Hooghly – is joined by Rivers Damodar and Mayurakshi 
before reaching the sea. The combined outfalls of the two branches together form 
the world's largest delta (the "Sunderban Delta" covering abou t 60,000 sq.km.) 
stretching across Bangladesh and West Bengal. Overall, River Ganga is more than 
2500 km long.1 Diagram of River Ganga and her major tributaries are given in 
Annexure  I. 
Salient Features of River Ganga  
 Total Length      2525kms  
 Uttarakhand      450kms  
 Uttar Pradesh      1000kms  
 Sharing length between UP & Bihar   110kms  
 Bihar       405kms  
                                                           
1 Ganga River Bas in Management Plan, 2015, p.17 -18.   2 
 
 Jharkhand      40kms  
 West Bengal      520kms   
 Catchment Area Ganga Basin    8,61,404 sq km (26.4%) of India  
 Average Annual Discharge    4,93,400 million cubic meter  
 Main Tributaries     Yamuna, Ramganga, Gonti, Ghaghara,  
       Gandak, Damodar, Kosi & Kali -East 
  
 Main Sub tributaries     Chambal, Sindh, Betwa, Ken,   
       Tons(beyond Five States), Sone &  
       Kasia -Haldi   
  
 Major Cities located on the bank    Srinagar, Rishikesh, Haridwar,   
       Roorke(in Uttarakhand), Bijnor, Narora, 
       Kanuj, Kanpur, Allahabad, Varanasi,  
       Mirzapur (in Uttar Pradesh), Patna,  
       Bhagalpur (in Bihar) and Brahrampur,  
       Serampore, Hawarah and Ko lkata (in  
       West Bengal)2     
           
Pollution Level  
 Rapidly increasing population, rising standards of living and exponential 
growth of industrialisation and urbanisation have exposed water resources, in 
general, and rivers, in particular, to various forms of degradation. The mighty 
Ganga is no exception. The pollution in the Ganga River is caused by both point 
sources such as  domestic & industrial waste water and non -point sources such as  
agricultural runoff, solid waste dumping, open defecation, left over  religious 
material, etc. The do mestic sewage contributes to 70 per cent  of the  pollution load 
while industri al waste water contribute to 20 per cent  of the  overall pollution load. 
Remaining 10 per cent of the pollution is due to non -point sources as mentioned 
above.3 
Pollution Assessment by C entral Pollution Control Board (CPCB)4 
Pollution Type  Description  
Municipal Sewage  As per CPCB, about 2723.3 mld of sewage is disposed 
in river Ganga from 36 Class I &14 Class II towns, 
against which a treatment capacity of about 1208.8 mld 
has been created.  
                                                           
2 Pollution Assessment: River Ganga, Central Pollution control Board, 2013,p.2.  
3 15th Report of the Committee on Estimates on Ganga Rejuvenation (2016 -17), p.27.  
4 Ibid. p.27    3 
 
Industrial Pollution  669 MLD of industrial waste water is discharged from 
1109 Grossly polluting industries (GPI) on main stem 
of the river Ganga. The main industrial sectors 
responsible for  pollution in Ganga are; Sugar, 
Distillery, Pulp and Paper, Tannery, and textile etc.  
Open defecation  As per 2011 census, 33.64 Lacs households in the five 
main states do not have an access to toilet facilities and 
out of these 28.91 Lacs households defecate openly and 
4.72 have an access to community toilets.  
 
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation has been 
implementing the scheme of Open Defecation Free 
(ODF) Zone for Rural areas along the banks of river 
Ganga under their Swachch Bharat Mission (SB M)-
Gramin Programme. Out of 4470 Ganga villages 
identified  by them 4464 villages have been declared 
ODF. A total of 977725 Individual House Hold Latrines 
(IHHLs) have been constructed which are eligible for 
financial aid and the Center’s share for the sam e comes 
to Rs. 1012 crores approx.  
Use of fertilizers  Eleven Ganga Basin states consume 10 million tons of 
chemical fertilizers per year, which constitutes 45% of 
the total chemical fertilizer consumption of the country 
leading to disposal of high levels of nitrogen and 
phosphorus. As per estimates, run off from arable lands 
contains up to 70mg/l of nitrogen and phosphorus 
ranging from .05 -1.1 mg/l, with potential to raise the 
nutrient level to a considerable degree in stream waters.  
Solid waste  About 14000 metric tons per day of Municipal Solid 
Waste  has been estimated to be generated from Class -I 
and Class -II cities/towns situated on the main stem of 
Ganga.  
 
Water Quality  
 The Ganga River is famous for its purity and its unique capacity for se lf 
purification due to high dissolved oxygen contents and radioactive radon reported 
in the river water by some workers. The river also supports a large population of 
macrophages - parasites, which according to some, multiply exponentially by 
attacking bact eria. But reduced flows of the Ganga and Yamuna with diminished 
dissolved oxygen, discharge of untreated industrial and municipal waste and 
effluents into the river, as also agricultural runoffs have much to do with degraded 
Ganga’s self cleaning capacity and river water quality.  
 Dissolved Oxygen ( DO), Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD),  Chemical 
Oxygen Demand  (COD ), fecal Colifor count (FCC) are some of the determinants   4 
 
of the river water quality. Sewage and Industrial wastes containing oxidisable 
organic ma tter exert a demand on dissolved oxygen, thereby reducing DO content 
of the  river. BOD indicates biochemically degradable organic content at the 
expense of DO. COD indicates total organic content of water. Adequate reserve of 
Oxygen (DO) in the river water  supports biochemical oxidation , while lack of it 
triggers anaerobic breakdown of organic matter and septic condition of the river5. 
 The four stretches of river Ganga where Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) 
levels are more than permissible limits, as monitored by CPCB  is given below6. 
State  Stretch  Identified   
Length of  
Stretch (k m) BOD range/ max 
value (mg/l)  
Uttarakhand  Haridwar to 
Sultanpur Adampu  10 4.2-5.8 
Uttar Pradesh  Kannauj to Varanasi  450  3.8-16.9 
Bihar  Buxar to Bhagalpur  40 7.8-2.7 
West  Bengal  Tribeni to Diamond 
Harbour  50 3.1-5.8 
 In other stretches, BOD levels are within permissible limits i.e. =<3 mg/l. 
However, as per monitoring reports of CPCB, entire stretch of river Ganga has 
high levels of faecal coliform against the prescribed limits.   
Measures to improve water quality  
Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase -I and Phase -II 
The Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase -I was launched as a centrally funded 
scheme in 1985 and later  Ganga Action Plan ( GAP ) Phase -II was initiated in 1993 
with the objective of improving the water quality of river Ganga. Various pollution 
abatement schemes including interception & diversion of sewage and setting up of 
sewage treatment plants were taken up under the Plan. Under  both phases of GAP, 
a total of 575 schemes have been sanctioned for undertaking pollution abatement 
activities in the identified  polluted stretches of the river Ganga, of which 524 
                                                           
5 Ibid,p.132.  
6 Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 3032, dated 03 August 2017.    5 
 
schemes with a capacity to treat pollution load of 1098 million litres per  day (mld) 
have been established under GAP -I and II respectively.7 
 
National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA)  
The  NGRBA has been established through the Gazette notification of the 
Government of India (Extraordin ary) No. 328 dated 20 February  2009 with the 
objectives of (a) ensuring effective abatement of pollution and conservation of the 
river Ganga by adopting a river basin approach to promote inter -sectoral co -
ordination for comprehensive planning and management; and (b) maintaining 
environm ental flows in the river Ganga with the aim of ensuring water quality and 
environmentally sustainable development.  
 NGRBA is mandated to take up regulatory and developmental functions 
with sustainability needs for effective abatement of pollution and cons ervation of 
the river Ganga by adopting a river basin approach for comprehensive planning 
and management. The authority is chaired by the Prime Minister and has as its 
members the Union Ministers concerned, the Chief Ministers of the  States through 
which G anga flows, viz., Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West 
Bengal, among others.   
 NGRBA functions include development of a Ganga River Basin 
Management Plan, regulation of activities aimed at prevention, control and 
abatement of pollution, to  maintain water quality and to take measures relevant to 
the river ecology in the Ganga basin states. It is mandated to ensure the 
maintenance of minimum ecological flows in the river Ganga and abate pollution 
through planning, financing and execution of p rogrammes.  
National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG)  
The N MCG was  registered as a society on 12  August 2011 under the 
Societies Registration Act 1860. It acted as implementation arm of National Ganga 
                                                           
7 Reply to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 786  dated, 16 July 2014    6 
 
River Basin Authority (NGRBA). The aims and objectives of  the society were to 
implement the work programme of NGRBA and assist the Minis try of 
Environment and Forests (M oEF) in accomplishing the mandate of NGRBA.  
 
National Council for Rejuvenation, Protection and Management of River Ganga  
 
The NGRBA was dissolv ed with effect from the 7 October 2016, 
consequent to constitution of  the National Council for Rejuvenation, Protection 
and Management of River Ganga vide notification no . S.O. 3187(E) dt. 7th 
October 2016 under  the Environment  (Protection) Act, 1986 , which  empowers 
NMCG to discharge its functions in an independent and accountable manner.  
The National Council is to follow the  following principles in taking 
measures for the rejuvenation, protection and man agement of River Ganga, 
namely:  
(I) the River Ganga s hall be managed as a single system;  
(II) the restoration and maintenance of the chemical, physical, and biological 
quality of the waters of River Ganga shall be achieved in a time bound 
manner;  
(III) the River Ganga shall be managed in an ecologically sustainable manner;  
(IV) the continuity of flow in the River Ganga shall be maintained without 
altering the natural seasonal variations;  
(V) the longitudinal, lateral and vertical dimensions (connectivities) of River 
Ganga shall be incorporated into river management processes and 
practices;  
(VI) the integral relationship between the surface flow and sub -surface water 
(ground water) shall be restored and maintained;  
(VII) the lost natural vegetation in catchment area shall be regenerated and 
maintained;  
(VIII) the aquatic and riparian biodiversity in River Ganga Basin shall be 
regenerated and conserved;  
(IX) the bank of River Ganga and its flood plain shall be construction free 
Zone to reduce pollution sources, pressures and to maintai n its natural 
ground water recharge functions;  
(X) the public participation in rejuvenation, protection and management,  
revision and enforcement of any regulation, standard, effluent limitation 
plan, or programme for rejuvenation, protection and management sh all 
be encouraged and made an integral part of processes and practices of  
   7 
 
A five tier structure has been created through the Order  No S.O. 3187(E) 
dated  7th October 2016  invoking the provision under Section 3 of Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 at the national, state and district level to take measures for 
prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution in river Ganga and 
to ensure continuous adequate flow of water so as to rejuvenate the river Ganga  as 
below:8 
1. National Ganga Council under chairmanship of Hon’ble Prime Minister of 
India,   
2. Empowered Task Force (ETF) on river Ganga under chairmanship of 
Hon’ble Union Minister of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation,   
3. National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG),   
4. State Ganga Co mmittees, and   
5. District Ganga Committees in every specified district abutting river Ganga 
and its tributaries in the States.   
Namami Gange Programme  
 The Namami Gange  programme was introduced in 2014 as an umbrella 
programme, with the aim of integrating previous and  currently ongoing initiatives 
by enhancing efficiency, extracting synergies and supplementing them with more 
comprehensive & better coordinated interventions. The Cabinet approved t he 
Namami Gange programme on 13 May  2015 for Rs. 20,000 crore for 5 years 
(2015 -20). This is a significant four -fold increase over the expenditure in the past 
30 years (Government of India incurred an overall expenditure of approximately 
Rs. 4000 crore on this task since 1985).  
 Marking a major shift in implementatio n, the Government is focusing on 
involving people living on the banks of the river to attain sustainable results. The 
program me also focuses on involving the States and grassroots level institutions 
such as Urban Local Bodies and Panchayati Raj Institution s in implementation. 
The program would be implemented by the National Mission f or Clean Ganga 
(NMCG), and its S tate counterpart organizations i.e., State Program Management 
                                                           
8 Official Website of National Mission for Clean Ganga    8 
 
Groups (SPMGs). NMCG  can issue such directions in writing as it may consider 
necessary for abatement of pollution and rejuvenation, protection and management 
of the River Ganga to the concerned authority or local authority or other 
authorities or Board or Corporation or perso n and they shall be bound to comply 
with such directions. The NMCG will also establish field offices wherever 
necessary. In  order to improve implementation, a three -tier mechanism has been 
proposed for project monitoring comprising of (a) High level task f orce chaired by 
Cabinet Secretary assisted by NMCG at national level, (b) State level committee 
chaired by Chief  Secretary assisted by SPMG at S tate level and (c) District level 
committee chaired by the District Magistrate.  
 In order to ramp up progress, t he Centre will now take over 100 percent  
funding of various activities/ projects under this program. Taking a leaf from the 
unsatisfactory results of the earlier Ganga Action Plans, the Centre now plans to 
provide for operation & maintenance of the assets for a minimum 10 year period, 
and adopt a Public Private Partnership (PPP)/Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
approach for pollution hotspots. In an attempt to bolster enforcement , the Ce ntre 
also plans to establish a four battalion Ganga Eco -Task Force, a Terr itorial Army 
unit, apart from contemplating on a legislation that aims to check pollution and 
protect the river.  
 The program emphasizes on improved coordination mechanisms between 
various Ministries /Agencies of Central and State G overnments. Major 
infrast ructure investments which fall under the original mandate of other ministries 
viz. Urban Development (UD), Drinking Water & Sanitation (DWS), 
Environment , Forests & Climate Change (EF&CC) etc., will be undertaken in 
addition.  
  The Namami Gange  will focus on pollution abatement interventions namely 
interception, diversion & treatment of wastewater flowing through the open  drains 
through bio -remediation/appropriate in -situ treatment/ use of innovative 
technologies/sewage treatment plants (STPs) /effluent treat ment plant (ETPs);   9 
 
rehabilitation and augmentation of existing STPs and immediate short term 
measures for arresting pollution at exit points on river front to prevent inflow of 
sewage , etc. 
 Significantly the approach is underpinned by socio -economic benef its that 
the program is expected to deliver in terms of job creation, improved livelihoods 
and health benefits to the vast population that is dependent on the river.9 
Projects under Namami Gange  Mission  
The Namami Gange Programme covers  short term, medium term a nd 
long term activities. Under s hort term activities certain entry level activities 
which covers development of Ghat crematoria & river surface cleaning 
activities , etc. have been taken up. Under m edium term activities existing 
sewage treatment plants (STPs) and effluent treatment p lants (ETPs) are being 
upgraded and new STPs  and ETPs  are being established. Beside, rural 
sanitation has been taken up in the villages on the banks of river Ganga. The 
long term action plan involves res toration of wholesomeness of river Ganga, 
and maintaining the ecological and  geological integrity of river.  
 The short term and m edium term projects are likely to be completed by 
2020. Under the Namami Gange Programme  a  total of 163 projects for various 
activities such as sewage infrastructure,  river front development, ghat and  
crematoria, ghat cleaning, rural sanitation , etc. have been sanctioned .10 Project 
status as on 31st October 2017 is given in Annexure -II. The funds 
allocated/released by National Mi ssion for Clean Ganga (NMCG) to the 
States/CPSUs/other agencies under Namami Gange Mission so far from Financial 
year 2014 -15 to 2017 -18 till 31st October, 2017 is given  in Annexure III.  
 
 
 
                                                           
9 PIB-Press Release dated, 13 May 2015  
10 Reply to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 3082 dated, 03 August 2017    10 
 
Sources Consulted  
1.Ganga River Basin Management Plan, 2015.  
2.Pollution Assessment: River Ganga, Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi,     
July 2013.  
3. Fifteenth Report of the Committee on Estimates on Ganga Rejuvenation(2016 -
17), Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi.  
4. Conservation of Water Quality of River Ganga,  A segmental Approach, CPCB, 
2016.  
5.Official websites of the National Mission for Clean Ganga 
(http://nmcg.nic.in/index.aspx ). 
6. Notification no . S.O. 3187(E) dated 7th October 2016  Ministry of Water 
Resources,  River Development, and Ganga Rejuvenation, The Gazette of India, 
7.10. 2017  
7.Reply to Lok Sabha Questions.  
8.PIB -Press Releases.  
9. Inputs from the National Mission for Clean Ganga, Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Reju venation dated 15 November 2017.  
   11 
 
Annexure -I 
 Course Of Ganga  
 
  12 
 
Annexure -II 
Projects Status as on  31st October2017  
Sl 
No Projects Undertaken  No of 
Projects  Sanction 
Cost                  
(Rs in Cr)  No of 
Projects 
Complet
ed No of 
Projects 
Under 
Progress  No of 
Projects 
Under 
Tendering  AA&
ES 
issued  Revise
d  
AA&E
S Total 
Expend
iture 
(Rs in 
Cr) 
Sewage Infrastructure  
1 Sewage Infrastructure  93 14063.01  18 28 39 7 1 2347.98  
Entry Level Activites  
2 Old Ghats & 
Crematoria ( Projects 
under 
NRCP/NGRBA -in 
State of West Bengal )  24 204.39  24 0 0 0 0 180.16  
Ghats & 
Crematoria(New 
Projects under 
Namami Gange 
Programme)  37 1164.02  0 21 14 2 0 45.24  
3 Ghats Cleaning  1 5.00 0 1 0 0 0 4.42 
 
4 River Surface 
Cleaning  1 55.24  0 1 0 0 0 0.00 
 
 Sub Total  63 1428.65  24 23 14 2 0 229.82  
 
River Front Development  
 
5 River Front 
Development  4 324.56  0 3 1 0 0 158.40  
 
Institutional Development (Non -Infrastructure)  
 
6 GKC  2 48.54  1 1 0 0 0 2.15 
7 GMC  1 46.69  0 0 0 1 0 0.00 
8 CPCB  3 202.28  0 3 0 0 0 19.03  
 Sub Total  6 297.51  1 4 0 1 0 21.18  
Project Implementation Support/Research & Study Projects  
9 Educating Schools & 
Communities for 
conserving habitat of 
Ganga River Dolphin  1 1.28 1 0 0 0 0 1.11 
10 Preparation of DPR of 
Forestry 
Interventation for 
Ganga  1 1.18 1 0 0 0 0 1.19 
11 Assessment of Water 
Qulaity & Sediment 
Analysis to 
understand the special 
property of river 1 5 1 0 0 0 0 2.81   13 
 
Afforestation  
15 Afforestation  10 112.10  0 10 0 0 0 78.94  
Rural Sanitation -UNDP  
16 Rural Sanitation -
UNDP  1 127.83  0 1 0 0 0 5.00 
Composite Ecological Task Force  
17 Composite 
Ecological Task 
Force  1 167.00  0 0 0 1 0 0.00 
Bioremediation  
18 Bioremediation  2 1.63 0 0 0 2 0 0.00 
Solid Waste Management  
19 Solid Waste 
Management  1 66.08  0 0 0 1 0 0.00 
GrandTotal  188 16631.42  46 72 54 15 1 2858.08  Ganga  
12 A Detail Study to 
Understand the Non -
Putrefying Property of 
River Ganga in both 
Water & Sediment  1 4.96 0 0 0 1 0 0.00 
 Sub Total  4 12.42  3 0 0 1 0 5.11 
Biodiversity  
13 Assessment of fish & 
fisheries of the Ganga 
river system for 
developing suitable 
conservation & 
restoration plan  1 5.80 0 1 0 0 0 1.42 
14 Biodiversity 
Conservation  2 24.83  0 2 0 0 0 10.23  
 Sub Total  3 30.63  0 3 0 0 0 11.65    14 
 
Annexure -III 
Funds Allocated Released NMCG to the States/CPSUs/Other Agencies under 
Namami  Gange from 2014 -15 to 2017 -18  (Rs.In crore)  
  2014 -
15 2015 -
16 2016 -
17 2017 -18* 
B. Break up of 
Expenditure/Releases          
1. Agencies /States          
Bihar   120.23  82.03  14.20  
Jharkhand  0.97 27.83  46.18  7.57 
UP 74.58  147.58  587.17  105.74  
Uttrakhand  4.26 30.26  30.66  66.98  
West Bengal  73.85  185.79  114.25  4.13 
Haryana   30.00  52.73   
Delhi   4.96 2.17 47.86  
Madhya Pradesh   3.39 6.50   
Rajasthan    20.00   
Sub Total  153.66  550.04  941.69  246.48  
B. Release to CPSUs & Other 
Implementing Agencies      
EIL  5.77 15.73  31.51  
NBCC   4.00 0 7.08 
WAPCOS   6.78 13.31  13.72  
NPCC    3.35 6.59 
EPIL    3.00 0.00 
CPCB   1.86 6.94 8.35 
Wild Life Institute    10.23  0.00 
Centre for Environment 
Engg,Lucknow  0.25 0.35 0.89 0.00 
NEERI,Nagpur   1.68 2.81 0.49 
Forest Research Institute   1.33 0 0.00 
CIFRI   0.01 0.68 0.74 
NYKS     4.00 
PCDA(GTF)     30.34  
Sub Total (B)  0.25  21.78  56.94  102.81  
Grand Total(A+B+C)  153.91  571.82  998.63  349.29  
 
*  For the year 2017 -18 Expenditure is upto  31.10.2017  
   15 
 
 
Sewerage Infrastructure Projects Approved  
Particulars  Till May 
2014  May 2014 to 
Oct 2016  Since Oct 
2016 till date  In Pipeline  
No. of 
Projects  34  13  46  2  
Amount 
Sanctioned 
(Rs in Cr)  3581.34  2005.46  7744.39  148 (Tentative 
Cost)  
STP capacity 
to be created 
(MLD)  583.03  149.30  1512.85  17  
STP Capacity 
to be created 
by 
rehabilitation 
(MLD)  92  410  82   
Sewer 
Network to be 
laid (Km)  2217.24  1446.74  1485.51   
Hybrid 
Annuity 
projects  Nil  Nil  13   
 